# Canan_2019_Dissociation and disasters A systematic review.

W J P World Journal of

Psychiatry

Submit a Manuscript: https://www.f6publishing.com

World J Psychiatr  2019 October 19; 9(6): 83-98

DOI: 10.5498/wjp.v9.i6.83

ISSN 2220-3206 (online)

SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS

Dissociation and disasters: A systematic review

Fatih Canan, Carol S North

ORCID number: Fatih Canan
(0000-0002-5133-4401); Carol S
North (0000-0001-6032-5323).

Author contributions: Canan F and
North CS were responsible for the
study conception and design and
writing of the manuscript.

Conflict-of-interest statement: The
authors report having no conflicts
of interest.

PRISMA 2009 Checklist statement:
The authors have read the PRISMA
2009 Checklist, and the manuscript
was prepared and revised
according to the PRISMA 2009
Checklist.

Open-Access: This article is an
open-access article that was
selected by an in-house editor and
fully peer-reviewed by external
reviewers. It is distributed in
accordance with the Creative
Commons Attribution Non
Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0)
license, which permits others to
distribute, remix, adapt, build
upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works
on different terms, provided the
original work is properly cited and
the use is non-commercial. See:
http://creativecommons.org/licen
ses/by-nc/4.0/

Manuscript source: Invited
manuscript

Received: April 9, 2019
Peer-review started: April 12, 2019
First decision: June 6, 2019
Revised: July 3, 2019
Accepted: August 21, 2019
Article in press: August 21, 2019
Published online: October 19, 2019

P-Reviewer: Chakrabarti S, Wang

Fatih Canan, Carol S North, The Altshuler Center for Education & Research at Metrocare
Services, Dallas, TX 75390, United States

Fatih Canan, Carol S North, Department of Psychiatry, The University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, United States

Corresponding author: Fatih Canan, MD, Postdoctoral Fellow, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Suite NE5.102,
Dallas, TX 75390, United States. fatihcanan@gmail.com
Telephone: +1-214-6485378
Fax: +1-214-6485599

Abstract
BACKGROUND
Dissociation, which is defined as the failure to associate consciousness, memory,
identity, emotion, perception, body representation, motor control, and behavior
into an integrated whole, has long been assumed to be generated by trauma. If
dissociation is a product of trauma exposure, then dissociation would be a major
mental health outcome observed in studies of disaster survivors. Although some
studies have examined dissociation in disasters, no systematic literature reviews
have been conducted to date on the topic.

AIM
To systematically evaluate the literature on the association between disaster and
dissociation to determine the prevalence and incidence of dissociation after
exposure to disaster and further examine their relationship.

METHODS
EMBASE, Medline, and PsychINFO were searched from inception to January 1,
2019 to identify studies examining dissociative disorders or symptoms related to
a disaster in adult or child disaster survivors and disaster responders. Studies of
military conflicts and war, articles not in English, and those with samples of 30 or
more participants were excluded. Search terms used were “disaster*” and
dissociation (“dissociat*,” “multiple personality,” “fugue,” “psychogenic
amnesia,” “derealization,” and “depersonalization”). Reference lists of identified
articles were scrutinized to identify studies for additional articles.

RESULTS
The final number of articles in the review was 53, including 36 articles with
samples of adults aged 18 and above, 5 of children/adolescents under age 18, and
12 of disaster workers. Included articles studied several types of disasters that
occurred between 1989 and 2017, more than one-third (38%) from the United
States. Only two studies had a primary aim to investigate dissociation in relation

83

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

YP
S-Editor: Ma YJ
L-Editor: Filipodia
E-Editor: Li X

to disaster and none reported data on dissociative disorders. All of the studies
used self-report symptom scales; none used structured interviews providing full
diagnostic assessment of dissociative disorders or other psychopathology. Several
studies mixed exposed and unexposed samples or did not differentiate outcomes
between exposure groups. Studies examining associations between dissociation
and disaster exposure have been inconclusive. The majority (75%) of the studies
compared dissociation with posttraumatic stress, with inconsistent findings.
Dissociation was found to be associated with a wide range of other psychiatric
disorders, symptoms, and negative emotional, cognitive, and functional states.

CONCLUSION
The studies reviewed had serious methodological limitations including problems
with measurement of psychopathology, sampling, and generation of
unwarranted conclusions, precluding conclusions that dissociation is an
established outcome of disaster.

Key words: Dissociation; Dissociative disorders; Disaster; Systematic review;
Methodology; Diagnostic validity; Psychopathology; Normative response; Posttraumatic
stress; Association vs causation

©The Author(s) 2019. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights reserved.

Core tip: Almost all existing studies of dissociation in relation to disaster have not
focused specifically on this purpose but rather on the relationship of dissociation to other
disaster outcomes. Instead of dissociative disorders, broadly defined dissociative
phenomena have been examined in disaster survivors. The literature uniformly contains
unsurmountable methodological limitations such as reliance on nondiagnostic
dissociation measures, lack of temporal specificity to postdisaster time frames, and
problems with disaster exposure issues pertaining to sampling, measurement, and
analysis. It cannot be concluded from the research that dissociation is an established
outcome of disasters.

Citation: Canan F, North CS. Dissociation and disasters: A systematic review. World J
Psychiatr 2019; 9(6): 83-98
URL: https://www.wjgnet.com/2220-3206/full/v9/i6/83.htm
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.5498/wjp.v9.i6.83

INTRODUCTION

The current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th edition) (DSM-
5)[1]  defines  dissociation  as  “a  disruption  of  and/or  discontinuity  in  the  normal
integration  of  consciousness,  memory,  identity,  emotion,  perception,  body
representation, motor control, and behavior” (p. 291). Dissociative disorders listed
and defined in DSM-5 are Dissociative Identity Disorder, Dissociative Amnesia, and
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder, as well as Other Specified Dissociative
Disorder and Unspecified Dissociative Disorder. The concept of dissociation was first
introduced in the field of medicine in the 1800s by the French physician Pierre Janet
who described it as a breakdown of the integration, or the compartmentalization, of
the mental processes required for a unified experience of consciousness and of self[2,3].
A variant of dissociation also introduced by Janet was described as "narrowing of the
field of consciousness," reflecting reduced capacity to assimilate elements of sensation
into complex personal perceptions, a process that has subsequently been linked to
hysteria[4,5]. Current concepts of dissociation encompass a wide range of phenomena
including highly pathological disturbances of memory such as in states of amnesia,
disturbance of consciousness such as in fugue states, and identity disturbance as well
as  common  and  benign  experiences  involving  attention  such  as  absorption,
daydreaming, and fantasy[6-8].

Dissociation has long been assumed to develop as a mechanism for coping with
severe trauma[3,9]. Extensive literature has documented a relationship between trauma
and dissociation and elaborated presumptive psychological mechanisms in a “trauma
model of dissociation”[10]. It follows logically that if dissociation is a product of trauma

84

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

exposure, then dissociation would be a major mental health outcome observed in
studies of disaster survivors. Despite the publication of some studies of dissociation in
disaster survivors, no major systematic reviews of this literature have been conducted.
Therefore, the lack of reviews of research on dissociation and disasters in the context
of widespread assumptions that trauma generates dissociative psychopathology, the
purpose of this article is to provide a systematic review of published studies on
dissociation and disaster to determine the prevalence and incidence of dissociation
after exposure to disaster and further examine their relationship.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

A  systematic  literature  search  was  undertaken  to  locate  studies  examining
dissociative disorders or symptoms related to a disaster in adult or child disaster
survivors and rescue/recovery workers. Only studies with samples of ≥ 30 were
included, because of known problems with non-normal sampling distributions in
smaller studies[11]. Articles not in English and studies of military conflicts and war
were excluded.

EMBASE, Medline, and PsychINFO were used to identify articles before January 1,
2019. Search terms used were “disaster*” and dissociation (“dissociat*,” “multiple
p e r s o n a l i t y , ”   “ f u g u e , ”   “ p s y c h o g e n i c   a m n e s i a , ”   “ d e r e a l i z a t i o n , ”   a n d
“depersonalization”).  Reference  lists  of  identified  articles  were  inspected  for
additional articles. Figure 1 provides a flow chart of this article selection process. The
manuscript was prepared and revised according to the PRISMA 2009 Checklist[12]. The
search strategy and list of excluded articles with the reason of exclusion are presented
in Supplementary table 1.

Quality appraisal
The quality of the included studies was measured using a modified version of a tool
generated for assessing the quality of prevalence studies[13,14]. The features assessed
included description of target population, inclusion/exclusion criteria, sampling
method, demographic characteristics, information on nonresponders, use of validated
and  professional-administered  diagnostic  instruments,  and  report  of  prevalence
estimates.  This  instrument  has  10-items  and  allows  for  the  calculation  of  a  total
quality score (range = 0-10), with higher summed scores indicating higher study
quality.

Assessment of risk of bias
The Hoy Risk of Bias Tool (RoBT)[15] was used to assess methodological bias. The
RoBT consists of 10 items evaluating external (4 items) and internal (6 items) validity.
Studies were classified as having a low risk of bias when 8 or more of the 10 items
were  answered  as  “yes  (low  risk),”  a  moderate  risk  of  bias  when  6  to  7  of  the
questions were answered as “yes (low risk),” and a high risk of bias when 5 or fewer
questions were answered as “yes (low risk)”[16].

Statistical analysis
Simple chi-square analyses were conducted to compare proportions of two different
comparison  groups  with  positive  findings,  substituting  Fisher’s  exact  tests  for
expected cell sizes of < 5.

RESULTS

Included studies
The final number of articles in the review was 53, including 36 articles with adult
(aged ≥ 18) samples (Table 1), 5 of children/adolescents (< age 18) (Table 2), and 12 of
disaster workers (Table 3). These articles, published between 1993 and 2019, included
51 original articles, 1 letter to the editor, and 1 doctoral dissertation. The disasters
occurred between 1989 and 2017, and 60% were from countries: United States (n = 20),
Netherlands (n = 4), Italy (n = 4), and Turkey (n = 4). The types of disasters included
earthquakes  (n  =  17),  explosive  accidents  (n  =  11),  terrorist  attacks  (n  =  8),
hurricanes/typhoons (n = 7), ferry sinkings (n = 3), firestorms (n = 2), floods (n = 2),
tsunamis (n = 2), fires (n = 1), plane crashes (n = 1), train crashes (n = 1), and mass
shootings (n = 1). Multiple disasters were examined in five of the articles. Specific
population subgroups, namely women, older adults (aged ≥ 60), and pet owners were
the focus in three adult survivor studies represented in four articles. More than one-
third  (36%)  of  the  articles  involved  longitudinal  prospective  studies  and  the

85

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

Figure 1

Figure 1  Flow chart of selection process for articles in the review.

remainder described cross-sectional studies.

Quality and risk of bias
The total quality score of the studies ranged from 1 to 5 (out of a maximum possible of
1 0 ) ,   i n d i c a t i n g   t h a t   n o n e   o f   t h e   s t u d i e s   i n c l u d e d   h a d   g o o d   q u a l i t y
(Supplementary table 2). According to the RoBT, the majority of studies had a high
risk of bias with only three having a moderate risk (Supplementary table 3).

Focus of the studies
Only two of the studies in the review focused solely on dissociation without including
other disaster mental health outcomes such as posttraumatic stress[17,18]. The majority
of studies (n = 40) had a primary focus on posttraumatic stress, including dissociation
only as a secondary topic, typically examining it in relation to posttraumatic stress.
The remaining few studies (n = 10) had a joint focus on posttraumatic stress and
dissociation, investigating the relationship between these two entities.

Dissociation measures
All of the studies used self-report symptom scales; none used structured diagnostic
interviews for dissociative disorders. The Peritraumatic Dissociative Experiences Scale
(PDEQ)[19] was used in 49% of the studies and the Dissociative Experiences Scale
(DES)[20,21] was used in 13%. The Maslach Burnout Inventory–Human Services Survey
(MBI-HSS)[22] was used to measure depersonalization in four studies. Dissociative
symptoms embedded in Criterion B of acute stress disorder were assessed by three
studies; two others approximated dissociation respectively with one panic disorder
symptom and a single traumatic event-related amnesia item.

Dissociation levels and associations with demographic and psychopathological
variables
Several studies in this review (for example[23-27]) reported dissociation levels in mixed
samples of exposed and unexposed survivors without differentiating results between
exposure  groups.  In  some  studies,  references  to  disaster  exposures  did  not
differentiate between disaster trauma exposure specifically, and the experiences of
other stressors in the disaster such as property damage or loss of possessions.

The  presentation  of  dissociation  data  was  limited  to  univariate  results  in  two

86

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Table 1  Studies of dissociation in adult disaster survivors

Disaster

Sample

Measures

Results

Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

Ferry sinking (Baltic Sea 1994)[93,94]

42 survivors

3 ASD dissoc. items

Earthquake (Haiti 2010)[28]

167 exposed volunteers

PDEQ

Explosion (France 2001)[95-97]

430 survivors from local EDs

PDEQ

Train crash (Israel 2005)[50]

53 survivors

Earthquake (San Francisco, CA
1993)[17]

100 exposed volunteer college
students

DES, PDEQ

SASRQ

Explosion (Denmark 2004)[29,42]

169 evacuees

4 TSC dissociation items

Floods/ mudslides (Italy 2009)[48]

287 exposed residents

DES, PDEQ

Explosion (Belgium 2004)[98]

1027 exposed residents

PDEQ

9/11, WTC (NYC 2001)[23]

1009 Manhattan residents, workers

1 DTS dissoc. item (event amnesia)

Earthquake (NZ, 2011)[40]

101 exposed treatment seekers

PDEQ (4 items)

9/11 Pentagon (Washington, DC
2001)[44]

77 exposed military, civilian staff

PDEQ

3 technological accidents
(Netherland)[99]

Hurricane Katrina (New Orleans,
LA 2005)[100]

49 affected individuals

PDEQ, SDQ-P

65 exposed pet owners

PDEQ

Hurricane Katrina (New Orleans,
LA 2005)[32]

117 people in mandatory evacuation
zones

PDEQ

Earthquakes; floods (Australia/NZ
2010-2011)[101]

662 exposed residents

PDEQ

Firestorm (Oakland/Berkeley
1991)[18,102]

94 referral center help seekers, 93
local students

SASRQ

9/11 WTC (NYC 2001)[24]

2001 NYC residents

2 DIS dissoc. panic attack items

Earthquake (Haiti 2010); tsunami
(Japan, 2011)[103]

140 Haiti/12 Japan disaster exposed;
80 other trauma exposed

DES

Mass shooting (DeKalb, IL 2008)[25]

583 female university students

4 PDEQ items

Earthquake (Iran 2017)[80]

230 exposed volunteers from 2 cities DES, PDEQ

Earthquake (Turkey 2011)[26]

583 randomly sampled residents

DES (with Taxon)

Earthquake (Turkey 2011)[27]

317 volunteer college students

DES (with Taxon)

3-mo dissoc. associated with 3-mo
and 1-yr but not 14-yr posttraumatic
stress

Mean 27-mo PDEQ score = 25.
Dissoc. predicted posttraumatic
stress symptoms and depression

6-mo dissoc. posttraumatic stress at 6
and 15 mo but not 5 yr

Scores higher in survivors with vs
without fibromyalgia (9 vs 2; 20 vs 9)

All 5 dissoc. subscale scores higher at
1 wk than 4 mo

Mean dissoc. Score = 6 (of 12). 3-mo
dissoc. predicted 1-yr posttraumatic
stress in women only and not 1-yr
somatization

DES, difficulty identifying feelings,
and externally oriented thinking
predicted 27-mo PDEQ. PDEQ
explained 44% of IES-R

5-mo dissociation predicted 5-mo
(not 14-mo) posttraumatic stress

Event amnesia was least endorsed
item (2%)

Dissoc. predicted posttraumatic
stress symptoms, anxiety at 2-8 wk

Dissoc. associated with posttraumatic
stress (18 vs 5) and alcohol use and
negatively with perceived safety

20-d dissoc. did not predict 6-mo
posttraumatic stress symptoms

Dissoc. associated with having to
abandon pet (mean PDEQ = 30 vs 23),
depression, acute stress, and
posttraumatic stress symptoms.

Mean PDEQ score = 12 (unknown
timing). Dissoc. associated with
property damage

Dissoc. associated with posttraumatic
stress symptoms and negative beliefs
about memory

1-mo dissoc. associated with 7-9-mo
posttraumatic stress symptoms but
not intrusions

4-5 mo dissoc. associated with
posttraumatic stress symptoms, older
age, female sex, non-white race, and
fear of death or injury

Dissoc. scores (unknown timing) not
different between trauma groups

2-wk dissoc. predicted 2-wk to 3-mo
and 8-mo probable posttraumatic
stress

3-4 mo dissoc. associated with
posttraumatic stress

2-yr DES Taxon membership = 25%.
Dissoc. predicted posttraumatic
stress symptoms, re-experiencing,
avoidance, and hyperarousal but not
functional impairment

High (21%) DES Taxon membership
(unknown timing). DES predicted
posttraumatic stress symptoms.
Pathological dissoc. mediated
between posttraumatic stress
symptoms and ADHD symptoms

87

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

Earthquake (Italy 2009)[35]

84 university student volunteers

14 TSI dissoc. items

Hurricane Ike (Texas coast,
2008)[66,104]

75 older residents

PDEQ

Tsunami (Indonesia 2004)[30]

660 evacuated Danish tourists

4 ERDTS dissoc. items

9/11 WTC (NYC 2001)[36,105]

75 exposed NYC residents

PDEQ, DES, CDS, CADDS

Explosion (Taiwan 2015)[47]

116 burn survivors

Fire (Nether-lands, 2000)[31]

662 residents

SDQ

PDEQ

Fire and explosion (Netherlands
2001, 2004)[106]

94 disaster, 111 non-disaster burn
survivors

3 ADS dissoc. items

7-yr dissoc. scores in exposed than
unexposed. Dissoc. not associated
with exposure

Mean PDEQ = 11. Dissoc. associated
with 3-mo posttraumatic stress but
not 3-mo depression. Dissoc. not
associated with posttraumatic stress
trajectories

10-mo dissoc. predicted
posttraumatic stress symptoms,
depression

Mean PDEQ = 35, DES = 17. 3-mo
dissoc. not associated 1-yr
posttraumatic stress symptoms.
Dissoc. not associated with exposure

25-mo dissoc. associated with
posttraumatic stress but not
depression

Mean PDEQ = 24. 2-3 wk dissoc. not
associated with 18-mo or 4-yr
posttraumatic stress symptom
severity

1-wk dissoc. Disaster > others.
Disaster: 1-wk dissoc. not associated
with 12-mo posttraumatic stress

ADS[107]: Anxiety and Dissociation Scale; ASD: Acute stress disorder measure; CDS[105]: Cambridge Depersonalization Scale; CADDS[108]: Clinician
Administered Dissociative States Scale; DES[20,21]: Dissoc.: Dissociation; Dissociative Experiences Scale; DIS[109]: Diagnostic Interview Schedule; DTS[110]:
Davidson Trauma Scale; ERDTS[30]: Emotional Reactions During Trauma Scale; NYC: New York City; NZ: New Zealand; PDEQ[19]: Peritraumatic
Dissociative  Experiences  Scale;  SASRQ[111]:  Stanford  Acute  Stress  Reaction  Questionnaire;  SDQ[112]:  State  Dissociation  Questionnaire;  SDQ-P[113]:
Somatoform Dissociation Questionnaire-Peritraumatic; TSC[114]: Trauma Symptom Checklist; TSI[115]: Trauma Symptom Inventory; WTC: World Trade
Center.

studies, one[17] documenting a decline in dissociation from 1 wk to 6 mo and the
other[23]  reporting  event  amnesia  in  only  2%  of  the  sample.  Demographic  factors
reported  to  be  associated  with  dissociation  in  bivariate  comparisons  included
advanced age[24,28], female sex[24,28-31], African American or Hispanic race[24], and limited
education[31].

The findings of associations between dissociation and disaster exposure in the
studies  reviewed  are  inconclusive.  Dissociation  was  found  to  be  significantly
associated with disaster exposure in three studies. Non-traumatic stressor exposures
by themselves or included in a mixed list of traumatic and other stressful disaster
exposures were associated with dissociation in a firestorm study[18] and a hurricane
study[32], and specific trauma exposures were associated with higher dissociation
scores among children in a severe earthquake[33]. Several studies did not identify
associations between dissociation and disaster exposures. Dissociation was not found
to be associated with disaster trauma exposures or exposure proxies such as physical
proximity to the World Trade Center towers in the 9/11 attacks[24], losing significant
others  or  possessions  in  the  disaster[24,34],  or  being  trapped  under  earthquake
rubble[34,35]. A study of survivors of the 9/11 attacks found that levels of dissociation
were not associated with immediate life threat in the disaster, indirect exposure via
threat to loved ones, or participation in rescue efforts[36]. Depersonalization in disaster
workers responding to a typhoon was not found to be associated with contact with
disaster survivors or witnessed disaster trauma exposures[37].

Three-fourths  (75%)  of  the  studies  (40  articles)  compared  dissociation  with
posttraumatic stress. These articles used self-report posttraumatic stress measures
such as the Impact of Event Scale-Revised, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
Checklist, PTSD Symptom Scale, and Child Posttraumatic Stress Disorder-Reaction
Index. As for dissociation, none of the studies of posttraumatic stress used structured
diagnostic assessment interviews. Of the 25 studies reporting results of bivariate
comparisons,  100%  reported  significant  associations  between  dissociation  and
posttraumatic stress. Of the 30 studies reporting results of multivariate models, only
60% found significant associations between dissociation and posttraumatic stress, a
significantly lower proportion (χ2 = 12.79, df = 1, P < 0.001). Of the 16 longitudinal
multivariate studies, only one-fourth (25%) found that dissociation measured shortly
after a disaster was associated with long-term posttraumatic stress, significantly less
often than in cross-sectional multivariate studies (χ2 = 5.12, df = 1, P = 0.024).

Of  the  seven  studies  conducting  bivariate  comparisons  of  dissociation  with
depressive pathology, all reported significant associations (for example[26,28,34,38,39]).

88

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Table 2  Studies of dissociation in child and adolescent disaster survivors

Disaster

Sample

Measures

Results

Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

Hurricane Katrina (New Orleans,
LA 2005)[41]

112 exposed students with ≥ 1 other
trauma exposure

9 TSCC dissoc. items

Earthquake (Turkey 2011)[34]

738 exposed high school students

A-DES

Earthquake (Turkey 1999)[33]

202 exposed, 101 unexposed children 11 TDGS dissoc. items

Ferry disaster (South Korea 2014)[65] 57 child and adolescent survivors

3 PDEQ items

Earthquake (China 2010)[116]

753 exposed middle school students

1 UPRI dissoc. item (derealization)

4-mo to 7-yr dissoc. associated with
posttraumatic stress symptoms,
anger, anxiety, depression

6-mo dissoc. associated with
posttraumatic stress, anxiety, prior
mental health problems,
metacognitions, but not with age, sex,
disaster exposure, prior exposure to
trauma

Exposed children had higher 4-5 mo
perceptual distortions (1.3 vs 1.2),
body-self distortions (1.1 vs 1.1)
(range = 1-3 for both subscales)

20-mo dissoc. associated with
posttraumatic symptoms

Majority (77%) positive for
derealization. 6-mo derealization
predicted PTSD

A-DES[117]: Adolescent Dissociative Experiences Scale; dissoc.: Dissociation; TDGS[33]: Traumatic Dissociation and Grief Scale; TSCC[118]: Trauma Symptom
Checklist for Children; UPRI[119]: The University of California at Los Angeles Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Reaction Index.

Only  two  of  five  studies  comparing  dissociation  with  depressive  pathology  in
multivariate models reported significant associations[28,30], a significant difference from
the bivariate analysis findings (Fisher’s exact test, P = 0.021). Other problems found to
be positively associated with dissociation in sporadic studies included anxiety[34,40,41],
somatization[42],  adult  attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder[27],  general  mental
health problems[43], increased postdisaster use of alcohol[44] or tobacco[38], suicidality[26],
hopelessness[26], anger[41], hostility[45], feeling unsafe[44,46], fear during the disaster[24,47],
alexithymia[48],  trauma  memory  disorganization[47],  trauma-related  rumination[47],
maladaptive  coping  strategies[49],  lower  academic  achievement[27],  greater  injury-
related  functional  impairment[47],  lower  health-related  quality  of  life[26],  and
fibromyalgia syndrome[50]. Dissociation was also associated with early traumatic
experience[51]  and  religiosity[28].  In  the  above  studies,  none  were  found  in  which
dissociation was not associated with any of these outcomes.

DISCUSSION

Although there are a number of reviews[52-55], meta-analyses[56,57], and a bibliometric
analysis[58] examining the studies on mental health outcomes of disasters, no prior
reviews have been published specifically on dissociation associated with disasters
even though a few reviews of PTSD and dissociation included very small numbers of
disaster studies without specific comment on them[59-62]. The current review found 53
published articles on this topic among adult and child survivors of disasters as well as
disaster  workers.  Only  2  of  the  53  studies  reviewed  was  designed  for  the  main
purpose of examining the prevalence of dissociation following a disaster. The main
purpose of the remaining 51 studies was to examine the occurrence of other outcomes
(posttraumatic stress in the majority) after disaster, and dissociation was included
only as a secondary outcome in relation to the primary outcome of interest. The
quality of the studies reviewed was exceedingly limited by methodological problems
inherent in them. Problems with measurement of psychopathology, sampling issues,
assessment time frames, and generation of conclusions unwarranted from the data
represented serious methodological weaknesses in this literature.

Dissociation measures
Problems in the instruments of assessment were fundamental limitations in all of the
studies reviewed. None used diagnostic instruments assessing accepted standards
such  as  DSM-5  criteria  for  dissociative  disorders;  dissociative  identity  disorder,
dissociative  amnesia,  and  depersonalization/derealization  disorder  were  not
mentioned in any of these studies’ findings. All depended on symptom measures to
assess dissociation, with 72% using the PDEQ, DES, or MBI-HSS. These self-report
questionnaires inquire about many kinds of experiences not generally corresponding
to the established symptoms of DSM-5 dissociative disorders; these items are then

89

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

Table 3  Studies of dissociation in exposed disaster workers

Disaster

Sample

9/11, WTC (NYC 2001)[38]

90 disaster workers

Measures

PDEQ

Results

Number of 2-3 wk dissoc. symptoms
associated with probable ASD

Typhoon Haiyan (Philippines
2013)[37]

61 religiously, spiritually oriented
humanitarian aid workers

MBI-HSS (5 depersonalization items) Mean 8-mo depersonalization score =

1.1 (of 30). Depersonalization
associated with negative religious
coping but not with indirect
exposure, direct exposure, or positive
religious coping

Earthquake (Japan 2011)[43]

34 healthcare providers

MBI-HSS (5 depersonal-ization items) Mean 2-yr depersonalization score =

Plane crash (Sioux City, IA 1989)[39]

207 exposed, 421 unexposed disaster
workers

3 ASD dissoc. items

9/11 WTC (NYC 2001)[46]

89 disaster responders

Hurricane Katrina (New Orleans,
LA 2005)[51]

441 rescue personnel

PDEQ

PDEQ

Earthquake (Loma Prieta, CA
1989)[67,68]

198 exposed, 251 unexposed rescue
personnel

PDEQ

0.6 (of 30). Depersonalization not
associated with general mental health

Number of 2-mo dissoc. symptoms
associated with 13-mo posttraumatic
stress but not depression. Any 2-mo
dissoc. symptoms not associated with
13-mo posttraumatic stress or
depression

2-wk dissoc. negatively associated
with perceived safety

2-yr dissoc. associated with being
single, exposure severity, physical
victimization

1.5-yr dissoc. associated with 3.5-yr
posttraumatic stress symptoms,
intrusion, avoidance, hyperarousal

Earthquake (Italy 2009)[49,120]

285 healthcare workers at one
hospital

MBI-HSS (5 depersonal-ization items) Mean 6-yr depersonalization score =

1.1 (of 30) Depersonalization
associated negatively associated with
planning and positively with
behavioral disengagement and self-
distraction

8-11 mo dissoc. predicted
posttraumatic stress

2-3 wk dissoc. predicted 18-mo
hostility, but not posttraumatic stress
symptoms or depression

Terror attacks (Norway 2011)[121]

238 rescue personnel

5-item scale developed by authors

Fire (Netherlands 2000)[45]

66 ambulance personnel

PDEQ

ASD: Acute stress disorder; dissoc.: Dissociation; MBI-HSS[22]: Maslach Burnout Inventory–Human Services Survey; NYC: New York City; NZ: New
Zealand; PDEQ[19]: Peritraumatic Dissociative Experiences Scale; WTC: World Trade Center.

tabulated and summarized into indistinct “dissociation” scores of unclear meaning or
significance.  The  PDEQ,  which  was  used  in  about  half  of  the  studies,  collects
information about lack of awareness that is not reflected in diagnostic criteria for any
dissociative  disorder,  and  its  other  items  do  not  provide  data  on  symptoms  of
dissociative  identity  disorder,  dissociative  amnesia,  or  depersonalization/
derealization disorder[63,64]. Numerous studies using the PDEQ have not been faithful
to the full instrument (for example[25,40,44,65,66]) or its scoring algorithms[50,51,67,68], creating
further threats to its validity in these studies. DES scores have been demonstrated to
correlate with dissociative disorder diagnoses, but its subscales are not only not
specific to dissociation but they also correlate with other psychopathology more
broadly[69,70]. The MBI-HHS depersonalization subscale does not measure diagnostic
constructs incorporated into depersonalization/derealization disorder.

A major problem with these dissociation measures is the potential for conflation of
nonpathological  experiences  with  the  pathological  components  of  dissociative
disorders.  Conceptually,  many  DES  items  elicit  experiences  that  are  common  in
general  populations  and  reflect  benign  or  everyday  processes  such  as  not
remembering  parts  of  conversations  or  complete  absorption  of  attention  in  a
television program or a movie, especially the items contained in the “imaginative
absorption” subgroup comprising about half of its items[7]. For example, “missing part
of a conversation” was endorsed by 83% of the general population in one study, and
even “feeling as though one were two different people” was endorsed by nearly
half[7]. Because the imaginative absorption subscale of the DES has been demonstrated
to  reflect  nonpathological  processes[7,71,72],  the  total  dissociation  score  from  this
instrument includes a substantive amount of nonpathological material contributed by
this subscale. To address this problem, a specifically pathological dissociative taxon

90

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

was  constructed  from  the  DES  items  considered  to  be  most  pathological  (and
specifically not including any of the imaginative absorption subscale items)[73]. The
DES  taxon  has  been  superior  to  the  entire  DES  in  correlating  with  dissociative
diagnoses[72,74,75], but it has not been demonstrated to have the ability to classify or even
identify dissociative disorders with reasonable accuracy[72,74]. No other dissociation
scales have been systematically examined for their ability to differentiate diagnosable
psychopathology from benign or nonpathological experiences.

Another problem with many dissociation measures (especially DES and MBI-HSS)
is the lifetime collection of dissociative experiences that is far broader than the time
frame of interest, i.e. the postdisaster period. Thus, much of the data collected with
these instruments may pertain to predisaster periods only, which thus cannot reflect
effects of the disaster ostensibly examined in these studies. In contrast, the PDEQ does
focus on the acute postdisaster time frame and thus its data does have the potential to
provide information relevant to effects of the disaster. However, the collection of
PDEQ  data  months  and  even  years  after  the  disaster  in  many  of  these  studies
introduced potential recall bias through the fading of memory with time elapsed since
the event.

Trauma exposures
Correct measurement of exposure is critical to the ability to determine if an outcome is
related  to  the  disaster.  Disaster  research  requires  special  attention  to  trauma
exposures, because of the conditional nature of the diagnostic construct of PTSD
requiring a qualifying exposure to trauma to consider symptoms or a diagnosis to be
disaster-related, and because psychosocial outcomes are highly linked to trauma
exposures[76]. Trauma exposure data are also needed in studies of dissociation to
determine  associations  with  disaster  to  support  assumptions  of  a  causal  role  of
disaster trauma in the development of dissociation. If it is unknown whether the
sample was even exposed, it cannot be stated whether exposure to disaster leads to
dissociation. Many of the reviewed studies enrolled samples without disaster trauma
exposure or mixed trauma-unexposed and trauma-exposed survivors resulting in
problems  of  sample  heterogeneity.  Many  studies  either  did  not  specify  disaster
trauma  exposure  or  mixed  exposure  groups  without  controlling  for  them  in  the
analyses. Some studies did not differentiate exposure to disaster trauma from other
disaster-related  stressors.  Many  of  the  studies  reviewed  did  not  even  compare
exposures with outcomes.

Prevalence of dissociation in different populations
Notwithstanding the many identified methodological problems in the studies of
dissociation reviewed here, comparison of levels of dissociation in disaster-affected
populations with dissociation in other populations provides a broader view of the
occurrence of dissociation in different settings. A number of studies have used the
DES to measure dissociation prevalence in general populations, disaster-affected
populations, and treatment populations, allowing comparison of these populations
using a consistent measure. General population studies using the DES have identified
average dissociation scores of 7-11 (out of a possible 100)[7,77-79]. Studies of disaster
survivors using the DES have found somewhat higher scores, 11-26[36,48,50,80]. Studies of
patients with dissociative disorders using the DES have found even higher scores, 24-
60 (for example[81-85]). Thus, disaster survivors in these studies seem to have observably
greater dissociation than in general populations, but it does not rise to the far higher
levels of dissociation patient populations.

The higher prevalence of dissociative findings in disaster survivor populations than
in  general  populations  could  possibly  relate  to  two  possibilities:  (1)  that  actual
dissociative psychopathology generated by disaster exposure; or (2) that benign or
nonpathological  experiences  generated  by  the  extreme  circumstances  of  disaster
exposure generating detectable scores on dissociation measures. Considering the first
possibility, if exposure to disaster trauma precipitates the development of dissociative
disorders, then it is possible that the somewhat higher dissociative scores in these
groups  could  reflect  modest  numbers  of  individuals  with  dissociative  disorders.
However, because none of the dissociative measures in the studies reviewed assessed
the diagnostic criteria for dissociative disorders, it is impossible to know if new
dissociative disorders follow disaster exposure. Considering the second possibility,
the somewhat higher dissociative scores in disaster survivor populations than in
general  populations  require  careful  interpretation.  They  could  at  least  partially
represent normative responses to disaster exposure that may not reflect pathological
states. Again, because none of the dissociative measures in the studies reviewed
assessed  the  diagnostic  criteria  for  dissociative  disorders,  assumptions  that  the
dissociation measured represents dissociative pathology may constitute a conflation
of nonpathological responses with psychopathology.

91

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

The conflation of normative responses to disaster trauma with psychopathology
may naturally arise from the extreme and unusual disaster circumstances promoting a
sense of bizarreness and unreality akin to a dream, fantasy, or movie, because it is
unlike other kinds of experience occurring in real waking life. Additionally, the focus
of  attention  in  disasters  may  be  narrowed  to  the  most  important  parts  of  the
experience, preventing memories of some parts of the experience whose absence
might be inadvertently interpreted as pathological amnesia rather than a natural
consequence  of  constricted  attention.  All  of  these  disaster  experiences  may  be
considered to be examples of the cognitive processes of the dissociative absorption
and imagination factor, which Ross et al[7] and Merckelbach et al[86] have interpreted as
nonpathological in modest amounts, such as in these studies of general populations
and disaster survivors. To the extent that general populations register small but
detectable scores of dissociation measures, they may have endemic levels of benign
dissociative  phenomena,  and  the  higher  scores  in  disaster  survivors  may  reflect
generation of more of these phenomena through extreme trauma exposure.

The still higher prevalence of reported dissociation in patients with dissociative
disorders  than  in  disaster  survivors  may  relate  to  presence  of  the  dissociative
psychopathology that defines dissociative patient populations as well as to patient
reporting  styles[87].  In  part,  because  all  patients  with  dissociative  disorders  have
dissociative disorders, their scores on dissociative measures would be expected to be
higher than in other populations not selected for psychiatric illness, such as disaster-
exposed groups. Again, however, because the dissociative measures in the disaster
studies reviewed do not diagnose dissociative disorders, there is no information about
the  incidence  of  dissociative  disorders  following  disaster  exposure.  Dissociative
disorders are not listed among the classical responses to disasters[88], and even case
reports  of  dissociative  disorders  in  disaster  survivors  are  very  rare[89].  Thus,  the
association  of  new  dissociative  disorders  with  disaster  exposure  has  not  been
demonstrated, much less causation of dissociative disorders by disaster exposure.
Because a well-established characteristic of patients with dissociative disorders is a
strong tendency to over-endorse symptoms[87], it is difficult to know to what degree
the very high levels of dissociation in this population are an artifact of their symptom
endorsement styles and how much of it truly reflects dissociative disorders.

Dissociation and PTSD
Most of the disaster studies reviewed here compared dissociation with posttraumatic
stress. Like the measures for dissociation, the posttraumatic stress measures used in
these studies did not assess diagnostic criteria for PTSD, did not link symptoms to
PTSD-qualifying trauma exposures, included individuals not exposed to disaster
trauma, did not differentiate psychopathology from normative reactions, and did not
necessarily capture material from the acute postdisaster time frame. Most of the
studies  comparing  dissociation  with  posttraumatic  stress  reported  significant
associations between them. Because of the many serious limitations of both sets of
measures and the presence of other methodological issues, the interpretation of this
association may be tenuous[59], and even significant associations in bivariate analyses
did not hold up in multivariate analyses and longitudinal assessment. The presence of
an  association  between  dissociation  and  posttraumatic  stress  might  reflect  well-
known patterns of vulnerabilities to psychopathology broadly, as well as consistent
effects of endorsement styles on both dissociative and posttraumatic stress measures.
Even  reviews[61,62]  and  meta-analyses[59,60,90]  examining  studies  of  associations  of
dissociation with PTSD more broadly do not find consistent associations between
these two entities.

Dissociation and other psychopathology
In the studies reviewed, dissociation was associated not only with posttraumatic
stress, but with a wide range of other psychiatric disorders, symptoms, and negative
emotional, cognitive, and functional states. There could be a number of reasons for
such broad relationships and nonspecificity of associations with dissociation. This
could  represent  measurement  problems  related  to  the  known  problems  of
nonspecificity of certain dissociation instruments as discussed above. It is possible
that the phenomenon known as publication bias[91] or file drawer bias[92], in which
studies with significant or positive findings have a much greater likelihood of being
published,  might  have  contributed  to  such  broad  associations  with  dissociation.
Again, the apparent relationships of various disorders and negative states might
occur as artifacts of consistent reporting biases within individuals across different
measurements.

Conclusions
In summary, the body of literature on studies of dissociation in relation to disaster has

92

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

emerged almost completely from studies not focused specifically on this purpose but
rather to investigate the relationship of dissociation to other disaster outcomes. These
studies  uniformly  contain  unsurmountable  methodological  limitations  such  as
reliance on nondiagnostic dissociation measures with threats to validity including
conflation of nonpathological experiences with psychopathology, lack of temporal
specificity to postdisaster time frames, and problems with disaster exposure issues
pertaining  to  sampling,  measurement,  and  analysis.  Given  this  collection  of
methodological limitations in these studies, it cannot be concluded from this literature
that dissociation is an established outcome of disaster. Of particular interest is the
observation that no published articles, to the best of our knowledge, have presented
dissociative disorders as identified outcomes of any disaster studied. If there is a
relation of dissociative phenomena more broadly and the experience of disaster, it is
unclear from the research conducted what these experiences represent in terms of
negative mental health outcomes.

Methodologically  rigorous  research  is  needed  to  determine  the  prevalence  of
dissociative phenomena after disasters and their relationship to trauma exposure.
Studies are needed that provide systematic diagnostic assessment of dissociative
disorders such as structured interviews to formally establish the prevalence and
incidence of established dissociative disorders after disasters. Nosological research is
needed  to  further  clarify  the  distinctions  between  benign  or  normative  and
pathological dissociative responses to disaster trauma exposure, such as by examining
associations between observed dissociative phenomena and established indictors of
psychopathology  such  as  clinically  significant  distress,  functional  impairment,
seeking  treatment,  and  associations  with  other  established  psychopathology.
Additionally, a long list of serious methodological limitations identified in the studies
reviewed will need to be addressed in future research on dissociation and disaster
trauma can move forward to provide data of sufficient quality to render empirically
based conclusions.

Lessons learned
The  literature  on  dissociation  in  relation  to  disaster  contains  unsurmountable
methodological limitations such as reliance on nondiagnostic dissociation measures,
lack of temporal specificity to postdisaster time frames, and problems with disaster
exposure issues pertaining to sampling, measurement, and analysis. It cannot be
concluded from the research that dissociation is an established outcome of disasters.

ARTICLE HIGHLIGHTS

Research background
Trauma has long been assumed to be causally associated with the development of dissociation. If
trauma causes dissociation, then dissociation would be expected to emerge in disaster-exposed
populations.

Research motivation
Although some studies have investigated dissociation in disaster survivors, no prior reviews
have been published specifically on dissociation associated with disasters.

Research objectives
This review aimed to systematically evaluate existing studies on dissociation in disaster-exposed
populations and to examine the relationship between dissociation and exposure to disaster.

Research methods
A  systematic  search  was  performed  using  Embase,  Medline,  and  PsychINFO  databases  to
identify studies reporting on dissociative disorders or symptoms after disasters in adult or child
disaster survivors and rescue/recovery workers. The search used the following key terms:
“disaster*,”  “dissociat*,”  “multiple  personality,”  “fugue,”  “psychogenic  amnesia,”
“derealization,” and “depersonalization”. Only studies in English and those with a sample size
of 30 or more were considered. Studies of military conflicts and war were excluded.

Research results
The final review contained 53 articles, more than two-thirds (68%) reporting dissociation in
adults,  about  one-tenth  (9%)  in  children  or  adolescents,  and  about  one-fourth  (23%)  in
rescue/recovery workers, involving many different types of disasters. None of the included
studies assessed or provided data on dissociative disorders; all used self-report symptom scales.
Only two studies focused primarily on dissociation as a disaster outcome. Many of the samples
had no disaster trauma exposures or only some members with exposures, and some studies did
not differentiate exposure to disaster trauma from other disaster-related stressors. Most of the
disaster studies compared dissociation with posttraumatic stress and did not find consistent
associations between these two entities. A wide range of other psychiatric disorders, symptoms,

93

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

and  negative  emotional,  cognitive,  and  functional  states  were  found  to  be  associated  with
dissociation in disaster-exposed populations.

Research conclusions
The existing body of research on dissociation as an outcome of disaster is fraught with serious
methodological limitations in sampling, assessment of dissociation and other psychopathology,
and unwarranted causal assumptions. The magnitude of these limitations precludes definitive
conclusions regarding whether dissociation is an established outcome of disaster.

Research perspectives
Methodologically rigorous research that provide systematic diagnostic assessment of dissociative
disorders such as structured interviews is needed to determine the prevalence of dissociative
phenomena  after  disasters  and  their  relationship  to  trauma  exposure.  Further  nosological
research is needed to adequately differentiate between benign/normative and pathological
dissociative responses to disaster trauma exposure. Also, important methodological limitations
identified in the studies reviewed should be addressed in future research on the relationship of
dissociation and disasters.

REFERENCES

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Association AP.  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association 2013;
North CS. The Classification of Hysteria and Related Disorders: Historical and Phenomenological
Considerations. Behav Sci (Basel) 2015; 5: 496-517 [PMID: 26561836 DOI: 10.3390/bs5040496]
van der Kolk BA, van der Hart O. Pierre Janet and the breakdown of adaptation in psychological trauma.
Am J Psychiatry 1989; 146: 1530-1540 [PMID: 2686473 DOI: 10.1176/ajp.146.12.1530]
Brown P, Macmillan MB, Meares R, Van der Hart O. Janet and Freud: revealing the roots of dynamic
psychiatry. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 1996; 30: 480-9; discussion 489-91 [PMID: 8887698 DOI:
10.3109/00048679609065021]
Van der Hart O, Horst R. The dissociation theory of Pierre Janet. J Trauma Stress 1989; 2: 397-412
[DOI: 10.1002/jts.2490020405]
Butler LD. Normative dissociation. Psychiatr Clin North Am 2006; 29: 45-62, viii [PMID: 16530586
DOI: 10.1016/j.psc.2005.10.004]
Ross CA, Joshi S, Currie R. Dissociative experiences in the general population: a factor analysis. Hosp
Community Psychiatry 1991; 42: 297-301 [PMID: 2030014 DOI: 10.1176/ps.42.3.297]
Seligman R, Kirmayer LJ. Dissociative experience and cultural neuroscience: narrative, metaphor and
mechanism. Cult Med Psychiatry 2008; 32: 31-64 [PMID: 18213511 DOI: 10.1007/s11013-007-9077-8]
Spiegel D. Dissociating damage. Am J Clin Hypn 1986; 29: 123-131 [PMID: 3535482 DOI:
10.1080/00029157.1986.10402695]
Dalenberg CJ, Brand BL, Gleaves DH, Dorahy MJ, Loewenstein RJ, Cardeña E, Frewen PA, Carlson EB,
Spiegel D. Evaluation of the evidence for the trauma and fantasy models of dissociation. Psychol Bull
2012; 138: 550-588 [PMID: 22409505 DOI: 10.1037/a0027447]
Dunstan FD, Nix ABJ. How Large is a Large Sample? Teach Stat 1990; 12: 18-22 [DOI:
10.1111/j.1467-9639.1990.tb00092.x]

12 Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG; PRISMA Group. Preferred reporting items for systematic

13

14

15

reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. PLoS Med 2009; 6: e1000097 [PMID: 19621072 DOI:
10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097]
Giannakopoulos NN, Rammelsberg P, Eberhard L, Schmitter M. A new instrument for assessing the
quality of studies on prevalence. Clin Oral Investig 2012; 16: 781-788 [PMID: 21594656 DOI:
10.1007/s00784-011-0557-4]
Russell EJ, Fawcett JM, Mazmanian D. Risk of obsessive-compulsive disorder in pregnant and
postpartum women: a meta-analysis. J Clin Psychiatry 2013; 74: 377-385 [PMID: 23656845 DOI:
10.4088/JCP.12r07917]
Hoy D, Brooks P, Woolf A, Blyth F, March L, Bain C, Baker P, Smith E, Buchbinder R. Assessing risk of
bias in prevalence studies: modification of an existing tool and evidence of interrater agreement. J Clin
Epidemiol 2012; 65: 934-939 [PMID: 22742910 DOI: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2011.11.014]

16 Macaulay S, Dunger DB, Norris SA. Gestational diabetes mellitus in Africa: a systematic review. PLoS

17

18

One 2014; 9: e97871 [PMID: 24892280 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097871]
Cardeña E, Spiegel D. Dissociative reactions to the San Francisco Bay Area earthquake of 1989. Am J
Psychiatry 1993; 150: 474-478 [PMID: 8434665 DOI: 10.1176/ajp.150.3.474]
Koopman C, Classen C, Spiegel D. Dissociative responses in the immediate aftermath of the
Oakland/Berkeley firestorm. J Trauma Stress 1996; 9: 521-540 [PMID: 8827653 DOI:
10.1002/jts.2490090309]

19 Marmar CR, Weiss DS, Metzler TJ, Wilson JP and Keane TM. The peritraumatic dissociative

20

experiences questionnaire. Wilson JP and Keane TM. Assessing psychological trauma and PTSD. New
York: The Guilford Press 1997; 144-168
Bernstein EM, Putnam FW. Development, reliability, and validity of a dissociation scale. J Nerv Ment Dis
1986; 174: 727-735 [PMID: 3783140]
Carlson EB, Putnam FW. An update on the dissociative experiences scale. Dissociation 1993; 6: 16-27

21
22 Maslach C, Jackson SE. The measurement of experienced burnout. J Organ Behav 1981; 2: 99-113 [DOI:

23

24

10.1002/job.4030020205]
DeLisi LE, Maurizio A, Yost M, Papparozzi CF, Fulchino C, Katz CL, Altesman J, Biel M, Lee J, Stevens
P. A survey of New Yorkers after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Am J Psychiatry 2003; 160: 780-783
[PMID: 12668369 DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.160.4.780]
Lawyer SR, Resnick HS, Galea S, Ahern J, Kilpatrick DG, Vlahov D. Predictors of peritraumatic
reactions and PTSD following the September 11th terrorist attacks. Psychiatry 2006; 69: 130-141 [PMID:
16822192 DOI: 10.1521/psyc.2006.69.2.130]

94

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

31

33

30

34

28

36

27

32

29

26

35

25 Miron LR, Orcutt HK, Kumpula MJ. Differential predictors of transient stress versus posttraumatic stress
disorder: evaluating risk following targeted mass violence. Behav Ther 2014; 45: 791-805 [PMID:
25311288 DOI: 10.1016/j.beth.2014.07.005]
Ozdemir O, Boysan M, Guzel Ozdemir P, Yilmaz E. Relationships between posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), dissociation, quality of life, hopelessness, and suicidal ideation among earthquake survivors.
Psychiatry Res 2015; 228: 598-605 [PMID: 26106056 DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.05.045]
Özdemir O, Boysan M, Güzel Özdemir P, Yilmaz E. Relations between Post-traumatic Stress Disorder,
Dissociation and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder among Earthquake Survivors. Noro Psikiyatr
Ars 2015; 52: 252-257 [PMID: 28360719 DOI: 10.5152/npa.2015.7616]
Blanc J, Rahill GJ, Laconi S, Mouchenik Y. Religious Beliefs, PTSD, Depression and Resilience in
Survivors of the 2010 Haiti Earthquake. J Affect Disord 2016; 190: 697-703 [PMID: 26600411 DOI:
10.1016/j.jad.2015.10.046]
Christiansen DM, Elklit A. Risk factors predict post-traumatic stress disorder differently in men and
women. Ann Gen Psychiatry 2008; 7: 24 [PMID: 19017412 DOI: 10.1186/1744-859X-7-24]
Rosendal S, Salcioğlu E, Andersen HS, Mortensen EL. Exposure characteristics and peri-trauma
emotional reactions during the 2004 tsunami in Southeast Asia--what predicts posttraumatic stress and
depressive symptoms? Compr Psychiatry 2011; 52: 630-637 [PMID: 21349509 DOI:
10.1016/j.comppsych.2010.12.004]
van der Velden PG, Kleber RJ, Christiaanse B, Gersons BP, Marcelissen FG, Drogendijk AN, Grievink
L, Olff M, Meewisse ML. The independent predictive value of peritraumatic dissociation for postdisaster
intrusions, avoidance reactions, and PTSD symptom severity: a 4-year prospective study. J Trauma Stress
2006; 19: 493-506 [PMID: 16929504 DOI: 10.1002/jts.20140]
Hunt MG, Bogue K, Rohrbaugh N. Pet Ownership and Evacuation Prior to Hurricane Irene. Animals
(Basel) 2012; 2: 529-539 [PMID: 26487162 DOI: 10.3390/ani2040529]
Laor N, Wolmer L, Kora M, Yucel D, Spirman S, Yazgan Y. Posttraumatic, dissociative and grief
symptoms in Turkish children exposed to the 1999 earthquakes. J Nerv Ment Dis 2002; 190: 824-832
[PMID: 12486370 DOI: 10.1097/00005053-200212000-00004]
Kadak MT, Nasıroğlu S, Boysan M, Aydın A. Risk factors predicting posttraumatic stress reactions in
adolescents after 2011 Van earthquake. Compr Psychiatry 2013; 54: 982-990 [PMID: 23683538 DOI:
10.1016/j.comppsych.2013.04.003]
Piccardi L, Palmiero M, Nori R, Baralla F, Cordellieri P, D’Amico S, Giannini AM. Persistence of
Traumatic Symptoms After Seven Years: Evidence from Young Individuals Exposed to the L’Aquila
Earthquake. J Loss Trauma 2017; 22: 487-500 [DOI: 10.1080/15325024.2017.1328243]
Simeon D, Greenberg J, Nelson D, Schmeidler J, Hollander E. Dissociation and posttraumatic stress 1 year
after the World Trade Center disaster: follow-up of a longitudinal survey. J Clin Psychiatry 2005; 66: 231-
237 [PMID: 15705010 DOI: 10.4088/jcp.v66n0212]
Captari LE, Hook JN, Mosher DK, Boan D, Aten JD, Davis EB, Davis DE, Van Tongeren DR. Negative
Religious Coping and Burnout Among National Humanitarian Aid Workers Following Typhoon Haiyan. J
Psychol Christ 2018; 37: 28-41
Biggs QM, Fullerton CS, Reeves JJ, Grieger TA, Reissman D, Ursano RJ. Acute stress disorder,
depression, and tobacco use in disaster workers following 9/11. Am J Orthopsychiatry 2010; 80: 586-592
[PMID: 20950299 DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-0025.2010.01063.x]
Fullerton CS, Ursano RJ, Wang L. Acute stress disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and depression in
disaster or rescue workers. Am J Psychiatry 2004; 161: 1370-1376 [PMID: 15285961 DOI:
10.1176/appi.ajp.161.8.1370]
Duncan E, Dorahy MJ, Hanna D, Bagshaw S, Blampied N. Psychological responses after a major, fatal
earthquake: the effect of peritraumatic dissociation and posttraumatic stress symptoms on anxiety and
depression. J Trauma Dissociation 2013; 14: 501-518 [PMID: 24060033 DOI:
10.1080/15299732.2013.769479]
Graham RA, Osofsky JD, Osofsky HJ, Hansel TC. School based post disaster mental health services:
decreased trauma symptoms in youth with multiple traumas. Adv Sch Ment Health Promot 2017; 10: 161-
175 [DOI: 10.1080/1754730X.2017.1311798]
Elklit A, Christiansen DM. Predictive factors for somatization in a trauma sample. Clin Pract Epidemiol
Ment Health 2009; 5: 1 [PMID: 19126224 DOI: 10.1186/1745-0179-5-1]
Fujitani K, Carroll M, Yanagisawa R, Katz C. Burnout and Psychiatric Distress in Local Caregivers Two
Years After the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake and Fukushima Nuclear Radiation Disaster. Community
Ment Health J 2016; 52: 39-45 [PMID: 26303904 DOI: 10.1007/s10597-015-9924-y]
Grieger TA, Fullerton CS, Ursano RJ. Posttraumatic stress disorder, alcohol use, and perceived safety
after the terrorist attack on the pentagon. Psychiatr Serv 2003; 54: 1380-1382 [PMID: 14557524 DOI:
10.1176/appi.ps.54.10.1380]
van der Velden PG, Kleber RJ, Koenen KC. Smoking predicts posttraumatic stress symptoms among
rescue workers: a prospective study of ambulance personnel involved in the Enschede Fireworks Disaster.
Drug Alcohol Depend 2008; 94: 267-271 [PMID: 18093750 DOI: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2007.11.001]
Fullerton CS, Ursano RJ, Reeves J, Shigemura J, Grieger T. Perceived safety in disaster workers
following 9/11. J Nerv Ment Dis 2006; 194: 61-63 [PMID: 16462558 DOI:
10.1097/01.nmd.0000195307.28743.b2]
Su YJ. Prevalence and predictors of posttraumatic stress disorder and depressive symptoms among burn
survivors two years after the 2015 Formosa Fun Coast Water Park explosion in Taiwan. Eur J
Psychotraumatol 2018; 9: 1512263 [PMID: 30220984 DOI: 10.1080/20008198.2018.1512263]
Craparo G, Gori A, Mazzola E, Petruccelli I, Pellerone M, Rotondo G. Posttraumatic stress symptoms,
dissociation, and alexithymia in an Italian sample of flood victims. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2014; 10:
2281-2284 [PMID: 25489247 DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S74317]

39

40

43

37

42

38

45

41

44

46

47

48

49 Mattei A, Fiasca F, Mazzei M, Abbossida V, Bianchini V. Burnout among healthcare workers at L'Aquila:

50

51

its prevalence and associated factors. Psychol Health Med 2017; 22: 1262-1270 [PMID: 28503931 DOI:
10.1080/13548506.2017.1327667]
Buskila D, Ablin JN, Ben-Zion I, Muntanu D, Shalev A, Sarzi-Puttini P, Cohen H. A painful train of
events: increased prevalence of fibromyalgia in survivors of a major train crash. Clin Exp Rheumatol 2009;
27: S79-S85 [PMID: 20074445]
Komarovskaya I, Brown AD, Galatzer-Levy IR, Madan A, Henn-Haase C, Teater J, Clarke BH, Marmar
CR, Chemtob CM. Early physical victimization is a risk factor for posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms
among Mississippi police and firefighter first responders to Hurricane Katrina. Psychol Trauma 2014; 6:

95

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

92-96 [DOI: 10.1037/a0031600]
Bromet EJ, Atwoli L, Kawakami N, Navarro-Mateu F, Piotrowski P, King AJ, Aguilar-Gaxiola S, Alonso
J, Bunting B, Demyttenaere K, Florescu S, de Girolamo G, Gluzman S, Haro JM, de Jonge P, Karam EG,
Lee S, Kovess-Masfety V, Medina-Mora ME, Mneimneh Z, Pennell BE, Posada-Villa J, Salmerón D,
Takeshima T, Kessler RC. Post-traumatic stress disorder associated with natural and human-made disasters
in the World Mental Health Surveys. Psychol Med 2017; 47: 227-241 [PMID: 27573281 DOI:
10.1017/S0033291716002026]
Galea S, Nandi A, Vlahov D. The epidemiology of post-traumatic stress disorder after disasters. Epidemiol
Rev 2005; 27: 78-91 [PMID: 15958429 DOI: 10.1093/epirev/mxi003]
North CS. Current research and recent breakthroughs on the mental health effects of disasters. Curr
Psychiatry Rep 2014; 16: 481 [PMID: 25138235 DOI: 10.1007/s11920-014-0481-9]
North CS, Pfefferbaum B. Mental health response to community disasters: a systematic review. JAMA
2013; 310: 507-518 [PMID: 23925621 DOI: 10.1001/jama.2013.107799]
Hopwood TL, Schutte NSJPov. Psychological outcomes in reaction to media exposure to disasters and
large-scale violence: A meta-analysis. Psychol Violence 2017; 7: 316 [DOI: 10.1037/vio0000056]
Parker G, Lie D, Siskind DJ, Martin-Khan M, Raphael B, Crompton D, Kisely S. Mental health
implications for older adults after natural disasters--a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int
Psychogeriatr 2016; 28: 11-20 [PMID: 26212132 DOI: 10.1017/S1041610215001210]
Sweileh WM. A bibliometric analysis of health-related literature on natural disasters from 1900 to 2017.
Health Res Policy Syst 2019; 17: 18 [PMID: 30744641 DOI: 10.1186/s12961-019-0418-1]
Lensvelt-Mulders G, van der Hart O, van Ochten JM, van Son MJ, Steele K, Breeman L. Relations
among peritraumatic dissociation and posttraumatic stress: a meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 2008; 28:
1138-1151 [PMID: 18502549 DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2008.03.006]
Ozer EJ, Best SR, Lipsey TL, Weiss DS. Predictors of posttraumatic stress disorder and symptoms in
adults: a meta-analysis. Psychol Bull 2003; 129: 52-73 [PMID: 12555794 DOI:
10.1037//0033-2909.129.1.52]
van der Hart O, van Ochten JM, van Son MJ, Steele K, Lensvelt-Mulders G. Relations among
peritraumatic dissociation and posttraumatic stress: a critical review. J Trauma Dissociation 2008; 9: 481-
505 [PMID: 19042793 DOI: 10.1080/15299730802223362]
van der Velden PG, Wittmann L. The independent predictive value of peritraumatic dissociation for
PTSD symptomatology after type I trauma: a systematic review of prospective studies. Clin Psychol Rev
2008; 28: 1009-1020 [PMID: 18406027 DOI: 10.1016/j.cpr.2008.02.006]
Brooks R, Bryant RA, Silove D, Creamer M, O'Donnell M, McFarlane AC, Marmar CR. The latent
structure of the Peritraumatic Dissociative Experiences Questionnaire. J Trauma Stress 2009; 22: 153-157
[PMID: 19370700 DOI: 10.1002/jts.20414]
Carvalho T, Cunha M, Pinto-Gouveia J, da Motta C. Model comparison and structural invariance of the
Peritraumatic Dissociative Experiences Questionnaire in Portuguese colonial war veterans. Traumatology
2018; 24: 62 [DOI: 10.1037/trm0000134]
Lee SH, Kim EJ, Noh JW, Chae JH. Factors Associated with Post-traumatic Stress Symptoms in Students
Who Survived 20 Months after the Sewol Ferry Disaster in Korea. J Korean Med Sci 2018; 33: e90
[PMID: 29495137 DOI: 10.3346/jkms.2018.33.e90]
Pietrzak RH, Southwick SM, Tracy M, Galea S, Norris FH. Posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, and
perceived needs for psychological care in older persons affected by Hurricane Ike. J Affect Disord 2012;
138: 96-103 [PMID: 22285792 DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2011.12.018]

67 Marmar CR, Weiss DS, Metzler TJ, Delucchi KL, Best SR, Wentworth KA. Longitudinal course and
predictors of continuing distress following critical incident exposure in emergency services personnel. J
Nerv Ment Dis 1999; 187: 15-22 [PMID: 9952249]

68 Marmar CR, Weiss DS, Metzler TJ, Ronfeldt HM, Foreman C. Stress responses of emergency services

69

70

71

72

personnel to the Loma Prieta earthquake Interstate 880 freeway collapse and control traumatic incidents. J
Trauma Stress 1996; 9: 63-85 [PMID: 8750452 DOI: 10.1007/bf02116834]
Gleaves DH, Williams TL, Harrison K, Cororve MB. Measuring dissociative experiences in a college
population: A study of convergent and discriminant validity. J Trauma Dissociation 2000; 1: 43-57 [DOI:
10.1300/J229v01n03_04]
Van Ijzendoorn MH, Schuengel C. The measurement of dissociation in normal and clinical populations:
Meta-analytic validation of the Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES). Clin Psychol Rev 1996; 16: 365-382
[DOI: 10.1016/0272-7358(96)00006-2]
Giesbrecht T, Merckelbach H, Geraerts E. The dissociative experiences taxon is related to fantasy
proneness. J Nerv Ment Dis 2007; 195: 769-772 [PMID: 17984778 DOI:
10.1097/NMD.0b013e318142ce55]
Leavitt F. Dissociative Experiences Scale Taxon and measurement of dissociative pathology: Does the
taxon add to an understanding of dissociation and its associated pathologies? J Clin Psychol Med Settings
1999; 6: 427-440 [DOI: 10.1023/A:1026275916184]

73 Waller N, Putnam FW, Carlson EB. Types of dissociation and dissociative types: A taxometric analysis of

dissociative experiences. Psychol Methods 1996; 1: 300-321 [DOI: 10.1037//1082-989x.1.3.300]
74 Modestin J, Erni T. Testing the dissociative taxon. Psychiatry Res 2004; 126: 77-82 [PMID: 15081629

75

76

77

78

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2001.12.001]
Simeon D, Knutelska M, Nelson D, Guralnik O, Schmeidler J. Examination of the pathological
dissociation taxon in depersonalization disorder. J Nerv Ment Dis 2003; 191: 738-744 [PMID: 14614341
DOI: 10.1097/01.nmd.0000095126.21206.3e]
North CS, Pollio DE, Smith RP, King RV, Pandya A, Surís AM, Hong BA, Dean DJ, Wallace NE,
Herman DB, Conover S, Susser E, Pfefferbaum B. Trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder
among employees of New York City companies affected by the September 11, 2001 attacks on the World
Trade Center. Disaster Med Public Health Prep 2011; 5 Suppl 2: S205-S213 [PMID: 21900416 DOI:
10.1001/dmp.2011.50]
Akyüz G, Doğan O, Sar V, Yargiç LI, Tutkun H. Frequency of dissociative identity disorder in the general
population in Turkey. Compr Psychiatry 1999; 40: 151-159 [PMID: 10080263 DOI:
10.1016/S0010-440X(99)90120-7]
Levin R, Spei E. Relationship of purported measures of pathological and nonpathological dissociation to
self-reported psychological distress and fantasy immersion. Assessment 2004; 11: 160-168 [PMID:
15171464 DOI: 10.1177/1073191103256377]

79 Maaranen P, Tanskanen A, Honkalampi K, Haatainen K, Hintikka J, Viinamäki H. Factors associated

96

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

80

81

82

83

84

85

with pathological dissociation in the general population. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2005; 39: 387-394 [PMID:
15860027 DOI: 10.1080/j.1440-1614.2005.01586.x]
Nobakht HN, Ojagh FS, Dale KY. Risk factors of post-traumatic stress among survivors of the 2017 Iran
earthquake: The importance of peritraumatic dissociation. Psychiatry Res 2019; 271: 702-707 [PMID:
30791344 DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.12.057]
Carlson EB, Putnam FW, Ross CA, Torem M, Coons P, Dill DL, Loewenstein RJ, Braun BG. Validity of
the Dissociative Experiences Scale in screening for multiple personality disorder: a multicenter study. Am
J Psychiatry 1993; 150: 1030-1036 [PMID: 8317572 DOI: 10.1176/ajp.150.7.1030]
Latz TT, Kramer SI, Hughes DL. Multiple personality disorder among female inpatients in a state
hospital. Am J Psychiatry 1995; 152: 1343-1348 [PMID: 7653691 DOI: 10.1176/ajp.152.9.1343]
Saxe GN, van der Kolk BA, Berkowitz R, Chinman G, Hall K, Lieberg G, Schwartz J. Dissociative
disorders in psychiatric inpatients. Am J Psychiatry 1993; 150: 1037-1042 [PMID: 8317573 DOI:
10.1176/ajp.150.7.1037]
Simeon D, Hwu R, Knutelska M. Temporal disintegration in depersonalization disorder. J Trauma
Dissociation 2007; 8: 11-24 [PMID: 17409052 DOI: 10.1300/J229v08n01_02]
Tutkun H, Sar V, Yargiç LI, Ozpulat T, Yanik M, Kiziltan E. Frequency of dissociative disorders among
psychiatric inpatients in a Turkish University Clinic. Am J Psychiatry 1998; 155: 800-805 [PMID:
9619153 DOI: 10.1176/ajp.155.6.800]

86 Merckelbach H, Muris P, Rassin E. Fantasy proneness and cognitive failures as correlates of dissociative

experiences. Pers Individ Dif 1999; 26: 961-967 [DOI: 10.1016/S0191-8869(98)00193-7]

92

91

90

93

88

89

87 Merckelbach H, Boskovic I, Pesy D, Dalsklev M, Lynn SJ. Symptom overreporting and dissociative
experiences: A qualitative review. Conscious Cogn 2017; 49: 132-144 [PMID: 28187372 DOI:
10.1016/j.concog.2017.01.007]
Gaon A, Kaplan Z, Dwolatzky T, Perry Z, Witztum E. Dissociative symptoms as a consequence of
traumatic experiences: the long-term effects of childhood sexual abuse. Isr J Psychiatry Relat Sci 2013;
50: 17-23 [PMID: 24029107]
Odagaki Y. A Case of Persistent Generalized Retrograde Autobiographical Amnesia Subsequent to the
Great East Japan Earthquake in 2011. Case Rep Psychiatry 2017; 2017: 5173605 [PMID: 28348911 DOI:
10.1155/2017/5173605]
Breh DC, Seidler GH. Is peritraumatic dissociation a risk factor for PTSD? J Trauma Dissociation 2007;
8: 53-69 [PMID: 17409054 DOI: 10.1300/J229v08n01_04]
Easterbrook PJ, Berlin JA, Gopalan R, Matthews DR. Publication bias in clinical research. Lancet 1991;
337: 867-872 [PMID: 1672966 DOI: 10.1016/0140-6736(91)90201-Y]
Franco A, Malhotra N, Simonovits G. Social science. Publication bias in the social sciences: unlocking the
file drawer. Science 2014; 345: 1502-1505 [PMID: 25170047 DOI: 10.1126/science.1255484]
Arnberg FK, Eriksson NG, Hultman CM, Lundin T. Traumatic bereavement, acute dissociation, and
posttraumatic stress: 14 years after the MS Estonia disaster. J Trauma Stress 2011; 24: 183-190 [PMID:
21442665 DOI: 10.1002/jts.20629]
Eriksson NG, Lundin T. Early traumatic stress reactions among Swedish survivors of the m/s Estonia
disaster. Br J Psychiatry 1996; 169: 713-716 [PMID: 8968628 DOI: 10.1192/bjp.169.6.713]
Birmes PJ, Brunet A, Coppin-Calmes D, Arbus C, Coppin D, Charlet JP, Vinnemann N, Juchet H, Lauque
D, Schmitt L. Symptoms of peritraumatic and acute traumatic stress among victims of an industrial
disaster. Psychiatr Serv 2005; 56: 93-95 [PMID: 15637199 DOI: 10.1176/appi.ps.56.1.93]
Birmes PJ, Daubisse L, Brunet A. Predictors of enduring PTSD after an industrial disaster. Psychiatr Serv
2008; 59: 116 [PMID: 18182556 DOI: 10.1176/ps.2008.59.1.116]
Bui E, Tremblay L, Brunet A, Rodgers R, Jehel L, Véry E, Schmitt L, Vautier S, Birmes P. Course of
posttraumatic stress symptoms over the 5 years following an industrial disaster: a structural equation
modeling study. J Trauma Stress 2010; 23: 759-766 [PMID: 21171137 DOI: 10.1002/jts.20592]
De Soir E, Zech E, Versporten A, Van Oyen H, Kleber R, Mylle J, van der Hart O. Degree of exposure
and peritraumatic dissociation as determinants of PTSD symptoms in the aftermath of the Ghislenghien
gas explosion. Arch Public Health 2015; 73: 21 [PMID: 25897400 DOI: 10.1186/s13690-015-0069-9]
Hagenaars MA, van Minnen A, Hoogduin KA. Peritraumatic psychological and somatoform dissociation
in predicting PTSD symptoms: a prospective study. J Nerv Ment Dis 2007; 195: 952-954 [PMID:
18000459 DOI: 10.1097/NMD.0b013e3181594810]

95

94

97

96

98

99

100 Hunt M, Al-Awadi H, Johnson M. Psychological sequelae of pet loss following Hurricane Katrina.

Anthrozoos 2008; 21: 109-121 [DOI: 10.2752/175303708X305765]

101 KannisDymand L, Carter JD, Lane BR, Innes P. The relationship of peritraumatic distress and

dissociation with beliefs about memory following natural disasters. Aust Psychol 2018 [DOI:
10.1111/ap.12377]

102 Koopman C, Classen C, Spiegel D. Predictors of posttraumatic stress symptoms among survivors of the
Oakland/Berkeley, Calif., firestorm. Am J Psychiatry 1994; 151: 888-894 [PMID: 8184999 DOI:
10.1176/ajp.151.6.888]

103 Merrell H.   Dissociation Differences Between Human-made Trauma and Natural Disaster Trauma,
Thesis. George Fox University 2013. Available from: http://digitalcommons.georgefox.edu/psyd/126

104 Pietrzak RH, Van Ness PH, Fried TR, Galea S, Norris FH. Trajectories of posttraumatic stress

105

symptomatology in older persons affected by a large-magnitude disaster. J Psychiatr Res 2013; 47: 520-
526 [PMID: 23290559 DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2012.12.005]
Simeon D, Greenberg J, Knutelska M, Schmeidler J, Hollander E. Peritraumatic reactions associated with
the World Trade Center disaster. Am J Psychiatry 2003; 160: 1702-1705 [PMID: 12944351 DOI:
10.1176/appi.ajp.160.9.1702]

106 Van Loey NE, van de Schoot R, Faber AW. Posttraumatic stress symptoms after exposure to two fire

disasters: comparative study. PLoS One 2012; 7: e41532 [PMID: 22911810 DOI:
10.1371/journal.pone.0041532]

107 Van Loey NE, Maas CJ, Faber AW, Taal LA. Predictors of chronic posttraumatic stress symptoms

following burn injury: results of a longitudinal study. J Trauma Stress 2003; 16: 361-369 [PMID:
12895019 DOI: 10.1023/a:1024465902416]

108 Bremner JD, Krystal JH, Putnam FW, Southwick SM, Marmar C, Charney DS, Mazure CM.

Measurement of dissociative states with the Clinician-Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS). J
Trauma Stress 1998; 11: 125-136 [PMID: 9479681 DOI: 10.1023/a:1024465317902]

109 Robins LN, Helzer JE, Croughan J, Ratcliff KS. National Institute of Mental Health Diagnostic Interview
Schedule. Its history, characteristics, and validity. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1981; 38: 381-389 [PMID:

97

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Canan F et al. Dissociation and disasters

6260053 DOI: 10.1001/archpsyc.1981.01780290015001]

110 Davidson JR, Tharwani HM, Connor KM. Davidson Trauma Scale (DTS): normative scores in the

general population and effect sizes in placebo-controlled SSRI trials. Depress Anxiety 2002; 15: 75-78
[PMID: 11891997 DOI: 10.1002/da.10021]

111 Cardeña E, Koopman C, Classen C, Waelde LC, Spiegel D. Psychometric properties of the Stanford
Acute Stress Reaction Questionnaire (SASRQ): a valid and reliable measure of acute stress. J Trauma
Stress 2000; 13: 719-734 [PMID: 11109242 DOI: 10.1023/a:1007822603186]

112 Murray J, Ehlers A, Mayou RA. Dissociation and post-traumatic stress disorder: two prospective studies

of road traffic accident survivors. Br J Psychiatry 2002; 180: 363-368 [PMID: 11925361 DOI:
10.1192/bjp.180.4.363]

113 Nijenhuis E, van Engen A, Kusters I, van der Hart O, Dissociation. Peritraumatic somatoform and

psychological dissociation in relation to recall of childhood sexual abuse. J Trauma Dissociation 2001; 2:
47-66 [DOI: 10.1300/J229v02n03_04]

114 Briere J, Runtz M. The trauma symptom checklist (TSC-33) early data on a new scale. J Interpers

Violence 1989; 4: 151-163 [DOI: 10.1177/088626089004002002]

115 Briere J, Elliott DM, Harris K, Cotman A. Trauma Symptom Inventory: Psychometrics and association
with childhood and adult victimization in clinical samples. J Interpers Violence 1995; 10: 387-401 [DOI:
10.1177/088626095010004001]

116 Wei Y, Wang L, Wang R, Cao C, Shi Z, Zhang J. Prevalence and Predictors of Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder Among Chinese Youths After an Earthquake. J Soc Behav Pers 2013; 41: 1613-1623 [DOI:
10.2224/sbp.2013.41.10.1613]

117 Armstrong JG, Putnam FW, Carlson EB, Libero DZ, Smith SR. Development and validation of a

measure of adolescent dissociation: the Adolescent Dissociative Experiences Scale. J Nerv Ment Dis 1997;
185: 491-497 [PMID: 9284862]

118 Briere J.  Trauma symptom checklist for children. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources

119

1996;
Steinberg AM, Brymer MJ, Decker KB, Pynoos RS. The University of California at Los Angeles Post-
traumatic Stress Disorder Reaction Index. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2004; 6: 96-100 [PMID: 15038911 DOI:
10.1007/s11920-004-0048-2]

120 Mattei A, Fiasca F, Mazzei M, Necozione S, Bianchini V. Stress and Burnout in Health-Care Workers

121

after the 2009 L'Aquila Earthquake: A Cross-Sectional Observational Study. Front Psychiatry 2017; 8: 98
[PMID: 28659831 DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00098]
Skogstad L, Fjetland AM, Ekeberg Ø. Exposure and posttraumatic stress symptoms among first
responders working in proximity to the terror sites in Norway on July 22, 2011 - a cross-sectional study.
Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med 2015; 23: 23 [PMID: 25888472 DOI: 10.1186/s13049-015-0104-4]

98

WJPhttps://www.wjgnet.comOctober 19, 2019Volume 9Issue 6Published By Baishideng Publishing Group Inc
7041 Koll Center Parkway, Suite 160, Pleasanton, CA 94566, USA
Telephone: +1-925-2238242
E-mail: bpgoffice@wjgnet.com
Help Desk:https://www.f6publishing.com/helpdesk
https://www.wjgnet.com

© 2019 Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights reserved.
