# Caponnetto_2021_The Simulation Game-Virtual Reality Therapy for the Treatment of Social Anxiety Disorder A Systematic Review.

Systematic Review
The Simulation Game—Virtual Reality Therapy for the
Treatment of Social Anxiety Disorder: A Systematic Review

Pasquale Caponnetto 1,2,3,*, Sergio Triscari 1, Marilena Maglia 1,2,3,* and Maria C. Quattropani 1

1 Department of Educational Sciences, Section of Psychology, University of Catania, 95124 Catania, Italy;

sergio.triscari@studium.unict.it (S.T.); maria.quattropani@unict.it (M.C.Q.)

2 Center of Excellence for the Acceleration of Harm Reduction (COEHAR), University of Catania,

95123 Catania, Italy

3 CTA-Villa Chiara Psychiatric Rehabilitation Clinic and Research, 95030 Mascalucia, Italy
* Correspondence: p.caponnetto@unict.it (P.C.); m.maglia@unict.it (M.M.)

Abstract: (1) Background: With the term Virtual reality (VR) we refer to a three-dimensional environ-
ment generated by the computer, in which subjects interact with the environment as if they were
really inside it. The most used VR tools are the so-called HMD (head-mounted display) which make
it possible to achieve what theorists deﬁne “direct mediated action”. The aim of our systematic
review is speciﬁcally to investigate the applications of virtual reality therapy for the treatment of
social anxiety disorder, also known as social phobia. The most common treatment for social anxiety
disorder is represented by “in vivo exposure therapy” (iVET). This method consists of exposing the
participant, in a gradual and controlled way, to anxious stimuli, with the goal to change the subject’s
response to the object or situation that is causing the fear. However, the main ﬂaw of “in Vivo thera-
pies” is represented by both the huge costs involved and the possible disturbance variables that can
hinder the execution of the therapeutic treatment. Virtual reality exposure therapy could therefore, if
conﬁrmed in its effectiveness, constitute a solution to eliminate these two defects demonstrated by
“in vivo exposure therapy”. The goal is to use VR as a means for the clinician to build a tailor-made
path for the participant in order to make him acquire “in virtual” those skills necessary for a good
adaptation in the “real” world. (2) Methods: From February 2021 until the date of submission of the
article (September 2021), we conducted a systematic review aiming to verify the effectiveness of
virtual reality exposure therapy (VRET) for the treatment of SAD. (3) Results: We identiﬁed a total of
205 unique articles. Among these, 20 full-text articles were assessed for eligibility and 5 of these met
the eligibility criteria and were, therefore, included in the ﬁnal systematic review. (4) Conclusions:
Virtual reality therapies proved to be a valid alternative to the acquisition of social skills suitable
for improving the symptoms of SAD. Although there has not been a signiﬁcant difference between
VRET and iVET, the low costs and ﬂexibility of VRET open up new scenarios for achieving greater
psychophysical well-being.

Keywords: virtual reality; virtual reality exposure therapy; social anxiety disorder; social phobia;
VRET; cyberpsychology

Citation: Caponnetto, P.; Triscari, S.;

Maglia, M.; Quattropani, M.C. The

Simulation Game—Virtual Reality

Therapy for the Treatment of Social

Anxiety Disorder: A Systematic

Review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public

Health 2021, 18, 13209. https://

doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182413209

Academic Editor: Paul B. Tchounwou

Received: 30 October 2021

Accepted: 13 December 2021

Published: 15 December 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

iations.

1. Introduction

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

With the term Virtual Reality (VR) we refer to a three-dimensional environment
generated by the computer, in which subjects interact with the environment as if they
were really inside it [1]. Virtual reality represents a turning point in the human–computer
relationship, as it is able to make the user experience the “sense of presence”, thus making
the fundamental transition from the sensation of “perceiving information” to the sensation
of “being in the place of information” [2].

There are several incremental levels of simulation provided by Virtual Reality. In
particular, a distinction is made between: “Augmented Reality” (AR) when it is possible
to superimpose computer-generated images on reality; “Non Immersive Virtual Reality”

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182413209

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

International Journal ofEnvironmental Researchand Public Health(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

2 of 14

(Desktop VR) when, for example, we are faced with devices equipped with stereoscopic
3D such as modern televisions; “Immersive Virtual Reality” (IVR) when all the perceptual
channels of the subject are isolated and “total” immersion is experienced.

In light of this, the IVR built and digitally manipulated represents the “best” level
to carry out a direct mediated action. The subject thus becomes an active creator of his
experience, thanks to an immersive technology that not only gives him the feeling of being
physically present in the virtual world that surrounds him, but, above all, allows him to
interact with it [3].

Today, the most used immersive virtual reality devices are represented by head-
mounted displays, often accompanied by joysticks or Data Gloves—even if complete
haptic suits are being developed, capable of further redeﬁning the boundaries of “sense of
presence”. The reason why we feel so present within the environment built by VR is because
virtual reality employs simulation mechanisms very close to those used by our mind [4].
In essence, we can say that our mental system is itself a simulation system of reality.
The conﬁrmation of this is given by the innovative discovery of Giacomo Rizzolatti [5]
and collaborators, who identiﬁed the existence of two groups of bimodal visuo-motor
neurons, namely “canonical” neurons and “mirror” neurons that conﬁrm the existence of a
simulation system in our mind. In the clinical setting, VR systems have shown that they
can represent a credible, realistic and effective perspective, as well as easily adaptable to
different psychotherapeutic approaches [6].

The opportunities offered by VR systems to the ﬁeld of experimental psychology are
numerous: ﬁrst of all, we can add to the X and Y coordinates, the Z coordinate, or the
depth—this makes, together with the possibility of active interaction from the participant,
the perception of virtual space similar to the perception of real space. Secondly, we can
completely control the possible disturbance variables that intervene in a negative way
during the treatment.

The goal is to use VR as a means for the clinician to build a tailor-made path for the
participant in order to make him acquire “in virtual” those skills necessary for a good
adaptation in the “real” world. In fact, by providing users with a highly realistic, ﬂexible,
engaging, safe and controllable simulation, they are able to acquire the skill, conﬁdence,
mental and psychophysical preparation to face real-world activities [7].

The ﬁelds of psychological application in which this is possible are manifold, from
phobic disorders and PTSD (Post Traumatic Stress Disorder) to autism, attention deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), eating disorders (ADD), panic (DAP), schizophrenia, and
neuropsychological rehabilitation.

The aim of our systematic review work is speciﬁcally to investigate the applications
of virtual reality therapy for the treatment of social anxiety disorder, also known as social
phobia. This disorder falls into the DSM-V category of “Anxiety Disorders” and is charac-
terized by an “excessive and irrational fear of the social situations in which the individual
is exposed”. Analyzing the literature, we found many systematic reviews that deal with
anxiety disorders and phobias (Wechsler et al. [8]; Freitas et al. [9]; Kelson et al. [10]; Krzys-
tanek et al. [11]). However, no one focuses exclusively or deeply enough on Social Anxiety
Disorder per se.

The complexity of this disorder, therefore, requires a review exclusively dedicated to
it in order to prepare the ground for future experimental studies with technologies ever
closer to “reality”.

In particular, the declinations of social anxiety disorder, on which we focused, can
be identiﬁed as: performance/exam anxiety, public speaking anxiety, difﬁculty in dealing
with situations in which the individual is at the center of the attention. Social phobia, in
fact, is a rather widespread disorder among the world population—according to some
studies, the percentage of people who suffer from it varies from 3% to 13%.

The most common treatment for social anxiety disorder is represented by “in vivo
exposure therapy” (iVET). This method consists of exposing the participant, in a gradual
and controlled way, to anxious stimuli, in order to change the participant’s response

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

3 of 14

towards the object or situation that is causing the fear. However, the main ﬂaw of “in vivo
therapies” is represented by both the huge costs involved and the possible disturbance
variables that can hinder the execution of the therapeutic treatment. Virtual reality exposure
therapy could, therefore, if conﬁrmed in its effectiveness, constitute a solution to eliminate
these two defects demonstrated by “in vivo exposure therapy”.

In this regard, the cost sustainability for the VR intervention was analyzed by Robillard
et al. [12], who validate the SWEAT questionnaire, which measures the costs and effort
required to conduct exposure in vivo or in VR. In their research, after the evaluation of
265 exposure sessions (in vivo = 140; in virtuo = 125) it was shown that conducting VR
exposure is less expensive and more easily adaptable to the needs of patients.

VR technology systems allow the inﬁnite replicability of the anxious stimulus and the

modularity of the difﬁculty levels of the interactions.

In fact, if in the classic “In vivo exposure therapy” for the treatment of SAD the
presence and availability of a more or less varied clinical research team is necessary, in the
“Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy”; instead, everything can be performed digitally and
without particular time limits.

The cost of maintaining such a large team in in Vivo therapy, as well as the cost of
time to perform the procedures, is consequently halved as the team itself can be reduced to
a few doctors responsible for managing the therapy and technology, with return on the
price to pay for the patient.

Several criticisms have been advanced with respect to this perspective. For many
authors, even VRET has an inherent management cost; however, as Giuseppe Riva [4]
states, virtual reality has grown rapidly in the last decade and costs have decreased. One
should look at how the top-of-the-range HMD currently on the market cost a few hundred
dollars, whereas rehabilitation programs require licenses that are not extremely expensive.
With this in mind, VRET (Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy) can be used as a support
tool for psychotherapy to improve the quality of life of this population. There are many
socio-cultural implications that an innovative therapy such as VRET, if conﬁrmed in its
effectiveness, can offer to those suffering from social anxiety disorder. We will, therefore,
provide an updated review of VR therapeutic techniques and their effectiveness in clinical
practice in order to reduce or defeat this disabling disorder, and ﬁnally we will try to
understand if VRET produces better results than iVET.

2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Research Object

The purpose of this research is to verify the effectiveness of virtual reality therapy for
the treatment of Social Anxiety Disorder (or Social Phobia) with particular reference to its
forms of: examination/interview/performance anxiety, anxiety in public speaking, and
anxiety in dealing with situations in which the subject is the center of attention.

2.2. Search Strategy

The systematic review was completely carried out according to the PRISMA 2020
guidelines for systematic review by PRISMA Group [13]. The bibliographic research was
carried out from February 2021 until the date of submission of the article (September 2021)
in the databases of the PubMed, Psycnet, ResearchGate sites using the following string
of search terms: “Virtual Reality (or “VR”) and Social Anxiety Disorder”; “Virtual reality
(or “VR”) and social phobia”; “Virtual reality (or “VR”) and anxiety test”; “Virtual Reality
(or “VR”) and Public Speaking”; “Virtual reality (or “VR”) and interview anxiety”; “Virtual
reality (or “VR”) and performance anxiety”.

2.3. Eligibility Criteria

We have included every article written in English with no time limit on publication

date, meeting the following criteria:

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

4 of 14

(1) Participants: Patients diagnosed with social anxiety disorder and without further

(2)

diagnosis of mental illness.
Intervention: Immersive Virtual Reality Therapy using a head-mounted display
(HMD) and a digitally recreated virtual environment.

(3) Comparison: symptoms before “VRET (Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy) with im-

mersive virtual reality technologies” and “post-treatment” symptoms.

(4) Outcome: we considered the post-treatment symptoms related to the disorder, whether
or not there was the acquisition of social skills, and whether or not there was a greater
adaptation to the social environment.

2.4. Data Extraction

The data was extracted using a format that included for each article: author, year, title,
nation where the research took place, type of study, sample, measures used, results, and
follow-up if any.

2.5. Risk of Bias Assessment

The risk of bias for the included studies was assessed with Cochrane risk-of-bias tool

for randomized trials, version 2 (RoB 2) by Sterne et al. [14,15].

3. Results
3.1. Search Results

The articles resulting from the search phase in the databases listed above produced
a total of 386 articles. Another noteworthy article was also identiﬁed during the review
that was not detected from the research but that many other analyzed articles cited. After
this ﬁrst search, 182 duplicates were eliminated, thus identifying 205 unique articles. The
small number of studies conﬁrms that this is a new ﬁeld and that its potential has still to be
fully explored.

These articles were subject to further scrutiny, through the analysis of the titles and
abstracts, which led to the elimination of an additional 185 articles, not compatible with
the theme of the paper. The remaining 20 articles were read in their entirety, 15 of which
were excluded because they were not meeting the eligibility criteria. Finally, the number of
studies included in the qualitative summary was 5.

The above description is summarized in the ﬂowchart in Figure 1, whereas the data
extraction of these studies can be viewed in Table 1. Finally, the control analysis with the
RoB 2 was summarized in Figure 2.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

5 of 14

Figure 1. PRISMA (2020)—Flow Diagram.

Figure 2. Cochrane risk-of-bias tool (RoB 2).

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x  5 of 13    Figure 1. PRISMA (2020)—Flow Diagram. Participants completed all self‐assessments at pre‐treatment, post‐treatment and fol‐low‐up of 3 and 12 months—while the diagnostic evaluations were drawn up by doctoral candidates who were blind to the type of treatment. Both treatments were administered according to a manualized protocol for eight sessions. The VRET and EGT treatment groups were designed to be as similar as possible, with the exception of how exposure was delivered. Specifically, as far as VRET is concerned, the participants used an HMD that introduced them into a virtual environment, built by the experimenters, such as an auditorium where the therapist could manipulate the reactions of the audience while the subject was intent on pronouncing a speech. Regarding the EGT, it was conducted with the same “task” within an “In Vivo” group, consisting of a maximum of five collaborators and the real participant who deliv‐ered the speech. From the data analysis, we can observe how the two active treatments (VRET and EGT) showed a similar improvement in most of the measures. Participants in fact reported high expectations for a positive result after the first treatment session and satisfaction at the end of the sessions.   Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, x  8 of 13    Figure 2. Cochrane risk‐of‐bias tool (RoB 2). The research by Kampmann et al. [18] represents, in our review, the third random‐ized controlled study on the efficacy of VRET, applied to participants with social anxiety disorder. The sample of the study was composed in particular of 60 subjects who met the criteria for the diagnosis of SAD, verified through the Structured Clinical Interview (SCID) for the DSM‐IV. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: VRET (Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy); iVET (in Vivo Exposure Therapy); control group on the waiting list. After obtaining informed consent, eligible participants underwent a pre‐test and a post‐test, including a series of measures: The main outcome was the comparison of “pre” and “post” treatment social anxiety symptoms, measured with the Liebowitz So‐cial Anxiety Scale‐Self Report (LSAS‐SR)—and the “subjective fear of being negatively evaluated by others in social situations” measured with the Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale‐Brief (FNE‐B). Other measures used were: the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS‐21), Personality Disorder Belief Questionnaire (PDBQ), the Eurohis Quality of Life Scale (EUROHIS‐QOL)—also administered “pre” and “post” treatment. Finally, a behavioral assessment task was proposed in which speech duration and performance were assessed. A stopwatch was used to assess duration, whereas to assess speech performance, two independent judges, blind by condition and rating point, rated the videotaped speeches using 17 elements of a public speaking performance measure on a 5‐point Likert scale by Rapee and Lim, 1992 [19]. A follow‐up was performed after 3 months. VRET took place in a laboratory of the University of Amsterdam. Participants were made to use HMDs, through which they could interact with computer‐generated situations by the experimenters. The virtual situations covered one‐to‐one and group situations, aimed at causing anxiety in individuals with SAD, such as: giving a speech in front of an audience asking questions, talking to a stranger, buying and returning clothes, participating in a job inter‐view, being interviewed by reporters, having dinner in a restaurant with a friend, and having a blind date. Semi‐structured therapist‐controlled dialogues ensured a certain level of interaction between the virtual characters and the participant. Similarly, iVET consisted of gradual exposure therapy to real‐life situations. From the data analysis, it emerges that the two treatment conditions, VRET and iVET, correlate positively with a better assessment of so‐cial anxiety, avoidance, and perceived stress. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

6 of 14

Authors

Year

Title

Nation

Type of Study

Sample

Measures

Follow Up

Results

Table 1. Data Extraction. Authors included in the table in alphabetical order starting from the ﬁrst surname.

Page L. Anderson;
Matthew Price;
Shannan M. Edwards;
Mayowa A. Obasaju;
Stefan K. Schmertz;
Elana Zimand;
Martha R. Calamaras

Stéphane Bouchard;
Stéphanie Dumoulin;
Geneviève Robillard;
Tanya Guitard;
Évelyne Klinger;
Hélène Forget;
Claudie Loranger;
François Xavier
Roucaut

Isabel L. Kampmann;
Paul M. G.
Emmelkamp;
Dwi Hartanto;
Willem-Paul
Brinkman;
Bonne J. H. Zijlstra;
Nexhmedin Morina;

Hyun-Jin Kim;
Seulki Lee;
Dooyoung Jung;
Ji-Won Hur;
Heon-Jeong Lee;
Sungkil Lee;
Gerard J. Kim;
Chung-Yean Cho;
Seungmoon Choi;
Seung-Moo Lee;
Chul-Hyun Cho;

2013

2017

2016

2020

Virtual reality Exposure
therapy for Social
Anxiety Disorder: A
randomized Controlled
Trial

Virtual Reality
compared with in vivo
exposure in the
treatment of social
anxiety disorder: A
three-arm randomised
controlled trial

Exposure to virtual
social interactions in
the treatment of social
anxiety disorder: A
randomized controlled
trial

Effectiveness of a
Participatory and
Interactive Virtual
Reality Intervention in
Patients With Social
Anxiety Disorder:
Longitudinal
Questionnaire Study

USA

Randomized
Controlled Trial

Canada

Randomized
Controlled Trial

The
Nether-
lands

Randomized
Controlled Trial

97

59

60

Korea

Longitudinal Study

65

SCID
PRCS
FNE-B
BAT
CGI
CEQ

SCID
LSAS-SR
SPS
SIAS
FNE
BDI-II
BAT
SPRS
SWEAT
SSQ
PQ
GPQ
SCID
LSAS-SR
FNE-B
DASS-21
PDBQ
EUROHIS-
QOL
PDBQ
BAT

M.I.N.I.
KSAD
BAI
STAI
SPS
SIAS
FNE-B
ISS
PERS
LSAS-SR

YES (3 Months)
(1 Year)

The two active treatments (VRET-EGT) have showed similar improvement
on most measures.
The improvement is also maintained for up to 1 year.

YES (6 Months)

Both VRET and “in vivo” CBT were statistically signiﬁcant for improving
SAD-related measures.
Speciﬁcally, VRET has been shown to be more effective than “in vivo”
therapy for LSAS-SR and SPS.
All beneﬁts were maintained at the 6-month follow-up.

YES (3 Months)

The two treatment conditions (VRET and iVET) correlate positively with a
better assessment of social anxiety, perceived stress and avoidance.
Contrary to what iVET was expecting proved to be superior to VRET due
to the decrease in SAD symptoms and increased speech performance.

All measures improved after VRET treatment. Despite this, the
intervention in VR was not sufﬁcient to bring the subjects with SAD to the
level of healthy subjects.
In this perspective, one of the limits of the study compared with the others
it is represented by the lack of a real control group on the waiting list.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

7 of 14

Table 1. Cont.

Authors

Year

Title

Nation

Type of Study

Sample

Measures

Follow Up

Results

Helene S. Wallach;
Marilyn P. Saﬁr;
Margalit Bar-Zvi;

2009

Virtual Reality
Cognitive Behavior
Therapy for Public
Speaking Anxiety A
Randomized Clinical
Trial

Israel

Randomized
Controlled Trial

88

LSAS
SSPS
FNE
BAT

YES (1 Year)

A signiﬁcant correlation emerges between exposure therapies and
improvement in anxiety levels.
The FNE measurement does not have a signiﬁcant improvement.

Legend: BAI = Beck Anxiety Inventory; BAT (Anderson et.al.) = Behavioral Avoidance Test; BAT (Bouchard et al.|Kampmann et al.|Wallach et al.) = Behavioural Assessment Task; BDI-II = Beck Depression
Inventory; CEQ = Credibility and Expectancy Questionnaire; CGI = Clinician Global Impressions of Improvement; DASS-21 = Depression Anxiety Stress Scale; EUROHIS-QOL = Eurohis Quality of Life Scale;
FNE = Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale; FNE-B = Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale—Brief Version; GPQ = Gatineau Presence Questionnaire; ISS = Internalized Shame Scale; KSAD = Korean Social Avoidance
and Distress Scale; LSAS = Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale; LSAS-SR = Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale—Self Reported; M.I.N.I. = Mini-international neuropsychiatric interview PRCS = Personal Report of
Conﬁdence as a Speaker; PDBQ = Personality Disorder Belief Questionnaire; PERS = Post Event Rumination Scale; PQ = Presence Questionnaire; SCID = Structured Clinical Interview; SIAS = Social Interaction
Anxiety Scale; SPRS = Social Performance Rating Scale; SPS = Social Phobia Scale; SSPS = Self-statements during public speaking; SSQ = Simulator Sickness Questionnaire; STAI = State-Trait Anxiety Inventory;
SWEAT = Speciﬁc Work for Exposure Applied in Therapy.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

8 of 14

3.2. Characteristics of the Included Studies

The research by Anderson et al. [16] represents one of the ﬁrst randomized studies
that make a comparison between virtual reality exposure therapy and “in Vivo” exposure
therapy with regard to social anxiety disorder. In total, 97 participants, with an average
age of 39 years, predominantly women and meeting the criteria for social anxiety disorder,
veriﬁed through the “Structured Clinical Interview” (SCID) for the DSM-IV, were randomly
assigned to three groups: VRET (Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy); EGT (Exposure Group
Therapy); control group on the waiting list.

These participants identiﬁed the declination of “public speaking” as their primary
social fear. Speciﬁcally, the measures used in the research were: the “Personal Report of
Conﬁdence as a Speaker” (PRCS); the “Fear of Negative Evaluation—Brief Form” (FNE-B);
the “Behavioral Avoidance Test”; the Clinician Global Impressions of Improvement (CGI);
and the “Credibility and Expectancy Questionnaire” (CEQ).

Participants completed all self-assessments at pre-treatment, post-treatment and
follow-up of 3 and 12 months—while the diagnostic evaluations were drawn up by doctoral
candidates who were blind to the type of treatment. Both treatments were administered
according to a manualized protocol for eight sessions. The VRET and EGT treatment
groups were designed to be as similar as possible, with the exception of how exposure
was delivered. Speciﬁcally, as far as VRET is concerned, the participants used an HMD
that introduced them into a virtual environment, built by the experimenters, such as an
auditorium where the therapist could manipulate the reactions of the audience while the
subject was intent on pronouncing a speech.

Regarding the EGT, it was conducted with the same “task” within an “In Vivo” group,
consisting of a maximum of ﬁve collaborators and the real participant who delivered the
speech. From the data analysis, we can observe how the two active treatments (VRET and
EGT) showed a similar improvement in most of the measures. Participants in fact reported
high expectations for a positive result after the ﬁrst treatment session and satisfaction at
the end of the sessions.

The results of this randomized clinical trial demonstrate that VRET is effective in reduc-
speaking among those diagnosed with social anxiety

ing fears of public
disorder—improvement is also maintained 1 year later.

The research by Bouchard et al. [17] represents the second randomized study analyzed,
which compares VRET (virtual reality exposure therapy) and “In Vivo” therapy for social
anxiety disorder in the context of a cognitive behavioral psychotherapy. In line with the
other research covered in our systematic review, to ascertain the presence of a social anxiety
disorder, the participants were interviewed through the Structured Clinical Interview for
DSM-IV (SCID).

All diagnoses were reviewed and conﬁrmed by a second evaluator to increase
reliability—in particular, within the research a primary diagnosis of SAD was required
for at least the last 2 years. All diagnoses then underwent a further review that also met
the DSM-V diagnostic criteria. Participants (n = 59) were randomly assigned to three
different conditions: CBT in VRET (n = 17); In Vivo CBT (n = 22); and Control group on
the waiting list (n = 20). The exhibition “in Vivo” consisted of role-playing games, inside
and outside the therapist’s ofﬁce: in which the participant, for example, formulated bizarre
requests at shops or delivered an embarrassing speech in front of collaborators. In the VR
exhibition, instead, participants used HMDs and motion detectors, experimenting with
different scenarios, created digitally by the experimenters, such as the simulation of a job
interview or a speech in front of the public (It is also important to underline the presence
of a neutral scenario for the ﬁrst session, which is useful for becoming familiar with the
virtual environment). The treatment therefore consisted of 14 weekly therapy sessions
(in vivo or in virtual), of 60 min each. The objective of the exhibition was to develop a
new, adaptive and non-threatening vision of the feared social situations, and to verify the
effectiveness of the use of virtual reality on this objective.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

9 of 14

Regarding the clinical outcomes of the research, the authors used self-administered
assessments: both before and after treatment for each group, and during the 6-month follow-
up, conducted with the CBT groups. The main outcome was identiﬁed by the authors
as the “total score” of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale-Self Reported (LSAS-SR) which
evaluates fear and avoidance of a series of social interactions and performance situations.
Other scales used were: the Social Phobia Scale (SPS), the Social Interaction Anxiety
Scale (SIAS), the Fear of Negative Evaluation (FNE), and the Beck Depression Inventory
(BDI-II) to measure potential depressive symptoms associated with the disorder. The
researchers also asked the participants of the various groups to carry out a Behavioral
Assessment Task (BAT), both before the ﬁrst therapy session and after the last session.

Speciﬁcally, patients had to deliver an impromptu speech with the instruction to make
it last as long as possible (for a maximum of 6 min). This videotaped speech was then
evaluated by three independent blinded evaluators using the Social Performance Rating
Scale (SPRS). The research also includes measures relating to resources, advantages and
difﬁculties encountered with exposure therapies, and in particular with VRET: In order
to study the practical and ﬁnancial resources necessary for the sessions, in fact, therapists
ﬁll out the SWEAT questionnaire (Speciﬁc Work for Exposure Applied in Therapy) after
each therapy session—the elements of the SWEAT actually measure topics such as effort
in terms of the cost, time, and planning required to develop and conduct the exhibit and
the difﬁculties encountered (such as problems with hardware). On the other hand, with
the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire (SSQ) the side effects induced by HMD, commonly
known as Cybersickness, are measured.

Finally, the central element of VRET, namely the “Sense of Presence” is measured
through the Presence Questionnaire (PQ) and the Gatineau Presence Questionnaire (GPQ).
From the analysis of the data, statistically signiﬁcant results emerge in favor of expo-
sure therapies. Furthermore, CBT with VRET proves to be slightly more effective than
CBT in Vivo with regard to LSAS-SR and SPS. All beneﬁts were then maintained at the
6-month follow-up.

The research by Kampmann et al. [18] represents, in our review, the third random-
ized controlled study on the efﬁcacy of VRET, applied to participants with social anxiety
disorder. The sample of the study was composed in particular of 60 subjects who met the
criteria for the diagnosis of SAD, veriﬁed through the Structured Clinical Interview (SCID)
for the DSM-IV. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions: VRET
(Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy); iVET (in Vivo Exposure Therapy); control group on the
waiting list. After obtaining informed consent, eligible participants underwent a pre-test
and a post-test, including a series of measures: The main outcome was the comparison
of “pre” and “post” treatment social anxiety symptoms, measured with the Liebowitz
Social Anxiety Scale-Self Report (LSAS-SR)—and the “subjective fear of being negatively
evaluated by others in social situations” measured with the Fear of Negative Evaluation
Scale-Brief (FNE-B). Other measures used were: the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales
(DASS-21), Personality Disorder Belief Questionnaire (PDBQ), the Eurohis Quality of Life
Scale (EUROHIS-QOL)—also administered “pre” and “post” treatment.

Finally, a behavioral assessment task was proposed in which speech duration and

performance were assessed.

A stopwatch was used to assess duration, whereas to assess speech performance, two
independent judges, blind by condition and rating point, rated the videotaped speeches
using 17 elements of a public speaking performance measure on a 5-point Likert scale by
Rapee and Lim, 1992 [19]. A follow-up was performed after 3 months. VRET took place in a
laboratory of the University of Amsterdam. Participants were made to use HMDs, through
which they could interact with computer-generated situations by the experimenters.

The virtual situations covered one-to-one and group situations, aimed at causing
anxiety in individuals with SAD, such as: giving a speech in front of an audience asking
questions, talking to a stranger, buying and returning clothes, participating in a job in-

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

10 of 14

terview, being interviewed by reporters, having dinner in a restaurant with a friend, and
having a blind date.

Semi-structured therapist-controlled dialogues ensured a certain level of interaction
between the virtual characters and the participant. Similarly, iVET consisted of gradual
exposure therapy to real-life situations. From the data analysis, it emerges that the two
treatment conditions, VRET and iVET, correlate positively with a better assessment of
social anxiety, avoidance, and perceived stress.

Contrary to what was expected, iVET proved superior to VRET in terms of the decrease
in SAD symptoms and the increase in speech performance. Furthermore, although VRET
actually reduced anxiety and avoidance in social situations, it did not signiﬁcantly reduce
the fear of negative evaluation, which is a key cognitive feature of SAD. Despite this, the
overall results indicate that VRET has the potential to produce positive and generalizable
effects to real social situations. However, the reason why iVET was superior to VRET may
ﬁnd an answer within the historical context of the research.

In 2015/2016, the HMDs were still “immature” and probably did not allow the same
level of presence as an in vivo therapy, which is why the importance of working on
photorealism and interactivity of virtual environments is emphasized. The fourth study
we dealt with is the research by Kim et al. [20], which tried to analyze the effectiveness of a
participatory and interactive VR intervention on SAD.

In total, 32 participants “with SAD” and 33 “healthy” participants—with an average
age of 23 years and without signiﬁcant differences in terms of gender—completed the
study. Participants with SAD met the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria.

The study was part of a larger project conducted to evaluate the effects of interactive
and participatory VR solutions across psychological scales, functional near-infrared spec-
troscopy, functional magnetic resonance, and different physiological signals. Among these,
however, only the results of the psychological scale were analyzed for this study in order
to center the topic. The VR VIVE viewer (owned by the HTC company) was used for the
intervention. The VR intervention was designed to allow participants to perform a total of
six sessions. Speciﬁcally, participants were allowed to run two sessions in a row in a single
visit, and the ﬁrst session was started at an easy level. During the second session, however,
participants could select the desired level. The possibility of stopping at any time during
the VR experience was also explained to them, and that the researchers would be present
throughout the experience to deal with any unexpected events.

In the virtual situation, between 7 and 8 non-player characters appeared and presented
themselves and listened to an introductory speech given by the participant. As the difﬁculty
level increased, the attitudes of non-player characters who listened to the participant’s
introduction changed as they became distracted and chatted with each other. On the hard
level, one of the non-player characters challenged the participant while he was introducing
himself by saying, “Please introduce yourself correctly”.

To measure the effectiveness of the treatment, the participants completed a battery of
assessments to assess their psychological state before and after the therapeutic sessions.
The measures used were: the “Beck Anxiety Inventory” (BAI); the “State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory” (STAI); the “Social Phobia Scale” (SPS); the “Social Interaction Anxiety Scale”
(SIAS); the “Brief-Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale” (FNE-B); the “Internalized Shame
Scale” (ISS); the “Post-Event Rumination Scale” (PERS); and the “Liebowitz Social Anxiety
Scale” (LSAS). General anxiety symptoms as measured by BAI and STAI-T signiﬁcantly
improved after treatment, whereas STAI-S did not improve signiﬁcantly.

SPS, SIAS, KSAD, BFNE, and LSAS, which are measures for assessing symptoms of
SAD, all showed signiﬁcant improvement after VR. The ISS showed signiﬁcant improve-
ment on the overall scale and on the subscales of emptiness, self-punishment and fear
of error. There was no signiﬁcant difference in inadequacy. Negative rumination, which
is a subscale of PERS, showed signiﬁcant improvement after VR treatment, but positive
rumination did not.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

11 of 14

After the six overall sessions, it was analyzed whether the scores on the psychological
scales differed in the SAD group compared with those in the healthy group. The results
showed that even after completing the VR sessions, the SAD group continued to score
signiﬁcantly higher than the healthy control group on all psychological scales. In other
words, although signiﬁcant improvements in SAD symptoms were found after treatment,
these symptoms were still signiﬁcantly different than those in the healthy group.

This suggests that the effect of virtual reality treatment alone may not be sufﬁcient to
achieve the subject’s response or remission. In any case, the results must be evaluated in
the context of the research, which had both the limit of not having a real control group on
the waiting list and the limit of using self-assessment scales (a limit present, in part, also in
the other research) that could be “disturbed” by negative self-perceptions of participants
regardless of their performance and their real status.

Finally, we examine the study by Wallach et al. [21]. This study is chronologically
placed before all the others and for this reason it can represent a “precursor” of the studies
on virtual reality since in 2009 the technology was not very widespread. The aim of the
study was to verify the effectiveness of Virtual Reality associated with cognitive-behavioral
therapy for the treatment of Social Phobia, and in particular in its declination of “Public
Speaking Anxiety”.

Speciﬁcally, 88 participants were randomly sorted into the three conditions: VRET
with CBT (n = 28); CBT in Vivo (n = 30); control group on the waiting list (n = 30). The
treatment, speciﬁcally, consisted of role-playing games, to be performed in “reality” or
“virtual”, the latter through HMD that generated situations on the computer in which the
participant read a text in front of an audience that applauded, asked questions, or was
hostile. Each participant was therefore administered the Liebowitz Social Anxiety scale
(LSAS); self-statements during public speaking (SSPS); and the fear of negative evaluation
(FNE). Finally, a “Behavioral Task” was proposed in which at the end of the treatment the
participants conducted 10 min of conversation on a topic of their choice in front of a live
audience, and were evaluated on 10 anxiety indicators.

The results once again show a signiﬁcant positive correlation between exposure
therapies (both CBT and VRCBT) and the improvement of various measures with the
exception of FNE—results also conﬁrmed at one-year follow-up, published separately [22].
The use of Virtual Reality also seems to overcome many difﬁculties related to classical
therapy, such as costs and responsiveness of the subjects, and, therefore, represents an
attractive alternative therapy.

What is surprising in this study is that already in 2009, with not yet advanced tech-
nologies, the subjects responded positively to VRET, demonstrating how working in this
ﬁeld is really proﬁtable for achieving better psychophysiological well-being.

4. Discussion

So far, this systematic review represents one of the ﬁrst attempts to systematically
examine the studies that have compared the efﬁcacy of Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy
(VRET) with In Vivo Exposure Therapy (iVET) for Social Anxiety Disorder. Conﬁrming
our initial hypotheses, VRET has proved to be a valid alternative to “In Vivo” therapies
for the treatment of Social Anxiety Disorder and its various forms. From the various
analyzed research, it emerges that this therapy produces signiﬁcantly positive results in a
range that goes from 6 to 14 sessions. The research analyzed is positively correlated with
a better diagnosis of the main measure of SAD. Moreover, the studies that contemplate
a follow-up show that the curve of improvement is maintained over time. By critically
evaluating the research we observe how in the research by Anderson et al. [16], PRCS
and BAT measures show a signiﬁcant effect of active therapies compared with the waiting
list control group. There are no signiﬁcant differences between EGT and VRET except
for FNE-B, which only improves for EGT. In the research by Bouchard et al. [17], the
results were found to be consistent with other research. At post-treatment, VR was more
effective than traditional exposure on the primary outcome measure (LSAS-SR) and on

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

12 of 14

one of the ﬁve secondary outcome measures (SPS), whereas it was slightly less effective
on the FNE measure. The result on SWEAT also gives us empirical conﬁrmation of our
hypothesis that VRET would be a simpler and cheaper intervention than iVET at SAD,
thereby allowing the possibility to offer more exposure experiences. Bouchard et al. [17]
highlighted the importance of the therapeutic alliance in predicting the outcome of SAD
symptoms. In the study by Kampmann et al. [18], for example, where iVET was in some
cases (FNE-B; EUROHIS-QOL) superior to VRET, the participant and the therapist were in
two separate rooms during exposure to virtual reality. The absence of therapist support
may have negatively impacted the therapeutic alliance, and thus may have reduced the
effectiveness of VRET. Still in the research of Kampmann et al. [18], the regression analysis
demonstrated the efﬁcacy of VRET and IVET at post-treatment for LSAS-SR, BAT, PDBQ,
DASS-21 measures. However, there are still many limitations: in the research of Kim
et al. [20], although nearly all measures improved with VRET treatment (LSAS-SR; BAI;
STAI; SPS; SIAS; PERS; ISS; FNE-B) the latter was unable to carry participants with SAD at
the level of “healthy” participants. Another limitation of the studies is the frequent use
of self-assessment measures which may not reﬂect the real levels reached. Most of the
research (Anderson et al. [16]; Kampmann et al. [18]; Wallach et al. [21]) shows that the FNE-
B measurement achieves positive results only through “In Vivo” therapy. This result can
be interpreted in the perspective of a “realism” not yet achieved by available technologies,
which does not allow participants to completely reduce their social anxiety. Much remains
to be done to improve the technology behind VR exposure and thereby, the efﬁcacy of VRET.
However, by analyzing the research chronologically, in the various measures in common,
we can still conﬁrm a gradual improvement, in line with technological development, of
the exposure in virtuo. The hope is, therefore, the achievement of an even more “mature”
technology that can make a difference in the treatment of this debilitating disorder.

Put another way, the superiority of VRET over iVET should not be seen as much in the
perspective of the reduction in symptoms, since they seem to be equally effective, but in
the drastic reduction in the costs to carry out the therapy and in the ﬂexibility that allows
the clinician to control all the variables at stake. The low cost of VRET, in fact, may today
represent the turning point for a broader access to psychological care to socioeconomic
classes that are currently excluded.

In addition, Virtual Reality’s ﬂexibility opens up new psychotherapist scenarios in
which the risks that a “disturbance variable” could compromise the therapeutic work are
eliminated. Worth nothing, the analyzed research was exclusively based on Cognitive
Behavioral Therapy, thus it would be interesting to hypothesize the support of Virtual
Reality with other psychotherapeutic approaches.

Virtual Reality is not free from limits, among which the main one is represented by
so-called “cybersickness”. The hope in this regard is the development in the following
years of hardware and software technologies that can reduce this feeling of nausea and
allow for an even longer “exposures”. Of course, VR therapy is a tool that does not replace
the founding elements of the therapeutic relationship: dialogue and listening between
therapist and patient. Rather it has to be seen as an integrated approaches to the clinical
practice in which the therapist keeps nurturing the human contact with the patient by
creating a dialogue between classic psychotherapy and new technology. Of particular
interest is exploring the therapeutic process insofar it is related to the outcome, and it is
paramount to understanding mechanisms of change during therapy.

However, future research in this area should evaluate the effects of virtual reality
exposure in an even longer term. It should also always include a measure of the “sense of
presence” as this is what makes virtual reality a “transformative reality for the subject” [23].
In conclusion, standard data collection protocols should be improved in order to overcome
self-assessment measures and generate more accurate measures.

The study has the following limitations: ﬁrst of all, the low number of included studies
then the protocols employed in the above-described scientiﬁc papers present potential

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

13 of 14

limitations such as low number of participants/example data, low variability in the data
collection, and no comparison with respect to other methods.

5. Conclusions

In sum, virtual reality treatments seem to be an applicable option for decreasing the
symptoms of SAD through the social skills learning. Somewhat surprisingly, as high-
lighted by our results, the efﬁcacy of VRET is tantamount to iVET. Nonetheless, because
of the small number of studies included in this systematic review, many important ques-
tions are left unanswered, such as the repercussions for therapeutic alliance or the use of
other instruments than the self-report measures, for example, that should be addressed in
future research.

The future of Virtual Reality treatments is currently promising and will face new chal-
lenges in the coming years. There is a general need to understand how new technologies,
given their transformative potential, can ﬁnd a place within the therapeutic practice [24].

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, P.C., S.T., M.M.; methodology, P.C.; resources: S.T.; data
curation: S.T.; writing—original draft preparation, S.T.; writing—review and editing, S.T., M.M., P.C.
and M.C.Q.; supervision, M.C.Q. and P.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version
of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Institutional Review Board Statement: Not Applicable.

Informed Consent Statement: Not Applicable.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

Riva, G. Psicologia dei Nuovi Media; Il Mulino: Bologna, Italy, 2004.
Gramaglia, G. La Realtà Virtuale in Psicoterapia: Scienza o Fantascienza? Ilmiolibro Self Publishing: Milano, Italy, 2013.
Galeazzi, A.; di Milo, G. Nuove frontiere in psicoterapia: La realtà virtuale. Psicoter. Cogn. Comport. 2011, 17, 31–52.
Riva, G.; Gaggioli, A. Realtà Virtuali. Gli Aspetti Psicologici Delle Tecnologie Simulative e il Loro Impatto Sull’esperienza Umana; Giunti:
Firenze, Italy, 2019.
Rizzolatti, G.; Craighero, L. The mirror-neuron system. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 2004, 27, 169–192. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Barbato, S.; Di Natale, L. Finestre sul Futuro; Alpes: Roma, Italy, 2017.
Smith, J.D.; Steel, J. The use of virtual simulation for dismounted infantry training. In Proceedings of the NATO Modelling &
Simulation Conference, Shrivenham, UK, 24–26 October 2000.

8. Wechsler, T.F.; Kümpers, F.; Mühlberger, A. Inferiority or Even Superiority of Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy in Phobias? A
Systematic Review and Quantitative Meta-Analysis on Randomized Controlled Trials Speciﬁcally Comparing the Efﬁcacy of
Virtual Reality Exposure to Gold Standard in vivo Exposure in Agoraphobia, Speciﬁc Phobia, and Social Phobia. Front. Psychol.
2019, 10, 1758. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Freitas, J.R.S.; Velosa, V.H.S.; Abreu, L.T.N.; Jardim, R.L.; Santos, J.A.V.; Peres, B.; Campos, P.F. Virtual Reality Exposure Treatment
in Phobias: A Systematic Review. Psychiatr. Q. 2021, 92, 1685–1710. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

9.

10. Kelson, J.N.; Ridout, B.; Steinbeck, K.; Campbell, A.J. The Use of Virtual Reality for Managing Psychological Distress in

Adolescents: Systematic Review. Cyberpsychol. Behav. Soc. Netw. 2021, 24, 633–641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

11. Krzystanek, M.; Surma, S.; Stokrocka, M.; Roma ´nczyk, M.; Przybyło, J.; Krzystanek, N.; Borkowski, M. Tips for Effective
Implementation of Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy in Phobias—A Systematic Review. Front. Psychiatry 2021, 12, 737351.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

12. Robillard, G.; Bouchard, S.; Dumoulin, S.; Guitard, T. The development of the SWEAT questionnaire: A scale measuring costs and

efforts inherent to conducting exposure sessions. Annu. Rev. Cybertherapy Telemed. 2011, 167, 105–110. [PubMed]

13. PRISMA Statement. Available online: http://prisma-statement.org (accessed on 30 October 2021).
14.

Sterne, J.A.C.; Savovi´c, J.; Page, M.J.; Elbers, R.G.; Blencowe, N.S.; Boutron, I.; Cates, C.J.; Cheng, H.Y.; Corbett, M.S.; Eldridge,
S.M.; et al. RoB 2: A revised tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ 2019, 366, l4898. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Verhagen, A.P.; de Vet, H.C.W.; de Bie, R.A.; Boers, M.; van den Brandt, P.A. The art of quality assessment of RCTs included in

systematic reviews. J. Clin. Epidemiol. 2001, 54, 651–654. [CrossRef]

16. Anderson, P.L.; Price, M.; Edwards, S.M.; Obasaju, M.A.; Schmertz, S.K.; Zimand, E.; Calamaras, M.R. Virtual reality exposure
therapy for social anxiety disorder: A randomized controlled trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2013, 81, 751–760. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2021, 18, 13209

14 of 14

17. Bouchard, S.; Dumoulin, S.; Robillard, G.; Guitard, T.; Klinger, É.; Forget, H.; Loranger, C.; Roucaut, F.X. Virtual reality compared
with in vivo exposure in the treatment of social anxiety disorder: A three-arm randomised controlled trial. Br. J. Psychiatry 2017,
210, 276–283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

18. Kampmann, I.L.; Emmelkamp, P.M.; Hartanto, D.; Brinkman, W.P.; Zijlstra, B.J.; Morina, N. Exposure to virtual social interaction
in the treatment of social anxiety disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Behav. Res. Ther. 2016, 77, 147–156. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

19. Rapee, R.M.; Lim, L. Discrepancy between self- and observer ratings of performance in social phobics. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 1992,

101, 728–731. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

20. Kim, H.J.; Lee, S.; Jung, D.; Hur, J.W.; Lee, H.J.; Lee, S.; Kim, G.J.; Cho, C.Y.; Choi, S.; Lee, S.M.; et al. Effectiveness of a participatory
and interactive virtual reality intervention in patients with social anxiety disorder: Longitudinal questionnaire study. J. Med. Int.
Res. 2020, 22, e23024. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

21. Wallach, H.S.; Saﬁr, M.P.; Bar-Zvi, M. Virtual reality cognitive behavior therapy for public speaking anxiety A randomized clinical

22.

trial. Behav. Modif. 2009, 33, 314–338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Saﬁr, M.P.; Wallach, H.S.; Bar-Zvi, M. Virtual Reality Cognitive-Behavior Therapy for Public Speaking Anxiety: One-Year
Follow-Up. Behav. Modif. 2012, 36, 235–246. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

23. Riva, G.; Banos, R.M.; Botella, C.; Mantovani, F.; Gaggioli, A. Transforming Experience: The Potential of Augmented Reality and

Virtual Reality for Enhancing Personal and Clinical Change. Front. Psychiatry 2016, 7, 164. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

24. Caponnetto, P.; Milazzo, M. Cyber health psychology: The use of new technologies at the service of psychologycal well being and

health empowerment. Health Psychol. Res. 2019, 7, 8559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
