# Clough_2017_Psychosocial interventions for managing occupational stress and burnout among medical doctors a systematic review.

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 
DOI 10.1186/s13643-017-0526-3

R E S E A R C H

Open Access

Psychosocial interventions for managing
occupational stress and burnout among
medical doctors: a systematic review
Bonnie A. Clough1,6*, Sonja March1, Raymond J. Chan2,3, Leanne M. Casey4, Rachel Phillips5 and Michael J. Ireland1

Abstract

Background: Occupational stress and burnout are highly prevalent among medical doctors and can have adverse
effects on patient, doctor, and organisational outcomes. The purpose of the current study was to review and
evaluate evidence on psychosocial interventions aimed at reducing occupational stress and burnout among
medical doctors.

Method: A systematic review was conducted for original research articles reporting on psychosocial interventions
targeting occupational stress or burnout among medical doctors, published in the English language, and with data
collected at a minimum of two time points. Searches were conducted across five electronic databases, as well as by
manual search of Google Scholar. Data was extracted relating to study characteristics and outcomes, quality and
rigour, as well as modes of delivery and engagement. Studies were appraised using the Strength of
Recommendation Taxonomy (SORT) and Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP).

Results: Twenty-three articles were reviewed, which reported on interventions utilising cognitive-behavioural,
relaxation, and supportive discussion strategies. Only 12 studies allowed estimation of pre- to post-intervention
effects. Cognitive behavioural interventions demonstrated the strongest evidence, particularly for reducing stress.
Some evidence was identified to support the efficacy of relaxation-based approaches, but no such evidence was
found for the efficacy of discussion-based interventions, such as Balint groups. There was a lack of quality among
reviewed studies, with no studies receiving a quality rating of 1, and the overall body of evidence being rated as level
B, according to the SORT. Effect sizes were not pooled due to a lack of quality among the study sample.
Conclusion: This review found that despite increased scientific attention, the quality of research examining the
benefits of psychosocial/behavioural interventions for occupational stress and burnout in medical doctors remains low.
Despite this, interventions focused on cognitive and behavioural principles appear to show promise in reducing doctor
stress and burnout. Limitations of the current review include a lack of risk of bias assessment or pooling of analyses.
Recommendations for improving the quality of research in this area, as well as implications of the current body of
evidence are discussed.
Systematic review registration: PROSPERO CRD42016032595

Keywords: Stress, Burnout, Doctors, Physician, Medical practitioner

* Correspondence: b.clough@griffith.edu.au
1School of Psychology and Counselling, Institute for Resilient Regions,
University of Southern Queensland, 37 Sinnathamby Boulevard, Springfield
Central, QLD 4300, Australia
6Current address: School of Applied Psychology, Menzies Health Institute
Queensland, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus, 58 Parklands Drive,
Southport, QLD 4215, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© The Author(s). 2017 Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 2 of 19

The prevalence of burnout has been found to be as high
as 75% among doctors [1, 2], with the highest rates often
observed among junior doctors and those working at the
front line of patient care [3, 4]. Among doctors, occupa-
tional stress and burnout have been associated with
poorer quality of personal relationships, individual well-
being, and patient care [5–8]. Although sometimes
comorbid with mental health issues such as anxiety,
depression, and substance use [9–11], burnout is consid-
ered a distinct state of psychological stress generated by the
individual’s occupation and/or workplace and is identified
as such in the World Health Organisation’s International
Classification of Diseases [12, 13]. Recent research has fo-
cused on interventions to assist doctors in developing the
skills and personal attributes needed to manage occupa-
tional stress and increase personal resiliency. The purpose
of the present paper was to systematically review this litera-
ture,
in order to critically evaluate and synthesise the
available evidence for the effectiveness of psychosocial
interventions
in reducing burnout and stress among
medical doctors. The results of this review are expected to
provide doctors, hospital and organisational stakeholders,
educators, and policy makers with a guide to the outcomes
and current state of evidence for these programmes.

Background
Stress and burnout in medicine
Occupational stress occurs when job-related factors
interact with individual factors, resulting in a change in
the individual’s psychological and/or physiological state
[14]. Burnout is a specific type of occupational stress
and involves symptoms of emotional exhaustion, deper-
sonalisation, and reduced feelings of personal accom-
plishment [15, 16]. It is a syndrome that is common
among those working in the helping professions and is
thought to be the result of the ongoing emotional de-
mands associated with these occupations [4, 17].

The effects of burnout can be substantial, not only for
doctors but also their patients. Burnout has been associ-
ated with significantly greater risk of making errors (e.g.
medication errors, diagnostic and decision making er-
rors) and suboptimal attitudes to patients (e.g. paying
little attention to the social or personal impact of an
illness) [2, 18]. Furthermore, burnout has been found
to be an independent predictor of self-reported major
medical errors [8], even after controlling for a range
of personal and professional factors [6].

At an individual

level, burnout among doctors has
been associated with lower career satisfaction, higher ab-
senteeism, greater probability of leaving the profession
prematurely or choosing early retirement, and greater
risk of experiencing difficulties in interpersonal relation-
ships, such as with family and partners [3, 19, 20]. Many
job
of these individual

factors, such as absenteeism,

turnover, and early retirement, also result in adverse
effects at the organisational level with burnout being
associated with reduced workplace productivity and
efficiency, reduced practice revenue, and greater prob-
ability of ordering unnecessary tests or procedures.
Collectively, these factors result in greater unneces-
sary medical costs (direct and indirect) and patient
burden [20]. It is clear that not only is burnout a
widespread concern among the medical profession
but also interventions to reduce stress and burnout
are in the interests of doctors, organisations, and,
most importantly, patients.

Interventions to reduce occupational stress and burnout
Interventions to reduce occupational stress and burnout
among doctors have primarily focused on changing or-
ganisational policies and procedures, such as reducing
working hours, caseloads, and on call periods (e.g.
[21–23]). The effects of such interventions focussing
exclusively on organisational factors have been mixed
(e.g. [24]), indicating that burnout is likely to be the
result of both individual and organisational level pro-
cesses. Further, the nature of medical practice (e.g.
continuous exposure to situations that require doctors
to provide medical care that can have life and death
consequences) is not amenable to change, and thus,
interventions directed at the organisational
level are
useful, but have restricted potential. Despite the large
research examining prevalence, correlates,
body of
and effects of burnout among medical doctors, compara-
tively little research has focused on investigating psycho-
social
interventions to reduce occupational stress and
burnout in this occupation. A systematic review con-
ducted by McCray and colleagues [3] identified limited re-
search on effective interventions for stress and burnout
among doctors and a lack of quality and methodological
rigour in the studies that had been conducted. In the
nearly 10 years since this review was conducted, there has
been increased attention and research in this field, with a
greater number of controlled trials and large-scale cohort
studies now available (e.g. [25–27]). As such, a systematic
review of the literature to gauge the effects of these inter-
ventions and to guide the development of programmes,
policy, and interventions is both timely and necessary.

The current review
The aim of the current study was to systematically re-
view evidence on psychosocial/behavioural interventions
targeting stress and burnout among medical doctors.
The review aimed to answer a number of questions, in
particular regarding (1) the overall efficacy of interven-
tions to reduce stress and burnout among doctors, (2)
the relative efficacy of interventions by theoretical basis
and type of intervention, and (3) the overall quality of

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 3 of 19

research in the area. To address the first two aims, stud-
ies were assessed for the possibility of conducting pooled
effect size analyses to aid data synthesis. Also of interest
were the delivery format and duration of interventions,
engagement strategies, populations investigated, and ac-
ceptability and satisfaction with interventions among
doctors. Search and data extraction strategies were de-
signed to target these key areas of interest.

Methods
Search strategy
A systematic review was conducted to identify articles
published prior to January 2016, which investigated in-
terventions for managing stress and burnout among
medical doctors. This systematic review adhered to the
Preferred Reporting Items
for Systematic Reviews
(PRISMA) checklist ([28], PRISMA checklist contained
in Additional file 1), and a publically available protocol
was registered prior to conducting the review (PROS-
PERO, registration number: CRD42016032595, http://
www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/). Five electronic data-
bases, PsycINFO, Medline, Informit, CINAHL, and Pro-
Quest Dissertations and Theses, were searched using
database subject headings (e.g. MeSH terms) and text
searches with key words (e.g. burnout, stress, physician,
doctor). The specific search strategies for each database
are outlined in Appendix 1. In addition, a manual search
for relevant articles was also conducted using Google
Scholar and ancestral searches through the reference
lists of articles included in the final review. Searches
were limited to studies written in the English language
and original research papers (i.e. rather than conference
proceedings, literature reviews, or summaries of inter-
views). From the initial search, titles and abstracts of ar-
ticles were screened,
followed by full-text screening.
Searches, eligibility assessment, and data extraction were
performed independently in an unblinded standardised
manner by two reviewers. Discrepancies between re-
viewers were resolved by discussion and consensus with
a third reviewer.

Study selection
The review targeted quantitative intervention evalua-
tions. For inclusion, studies were required to (1) be ori-
ginal research, (2) report on a psychosocial intervention
targeting individual level stress or burnout, and (3) be
tested among medical doctors as recipients of the inter-
vention. As a minimum design required for inclusion,
studies were required to report on the efficacy of an
intervention using at least two time points, for example
use of a pre-post design, rather than an intervention de-
scription or analysis of baseline characteristics of partici-
pants utilising a service. However, restrictions were not
made regarding use of comparator conditions or random

allocation, nor by field of specialisation or practice set-
ting (e.g. hospital, community, private practice). Instead,
the review focused broadly on summarising all available
evidence in this emerging field.

level

Studies that did not directly assess occupational stress
or burnout among doctors (e.g. depression, anxiety, or
substance use) were excluded, as were studies that
interventions such as
focused on organisational
changes to policies, procedures, or management (e.g.
changes to doctors’ working hours or on-call proce-
dures), and studies that focused only on acceptability or
satisfaction with an intervention without reporting inter-
vention effects. Although studies were not restricted by
level of training from registration as a doctor (e.g. intern,
registrar, consultant), studies reporting on interventions
for students were excluded.

Data extraction
Criteria for data extraction were determined prior to re-
view. The primary outcome measures were stress and
burnout. No restrictions were placed on how these out-
comes needed to be measured, for example whether by
physiological or self-report means. Summary data for
each study included design, participants, context/setting
(e.g. hospital or community), stated primary and second-
ary outcomes, intervention details (theoretical underpin-
nings, duration, delivery format), outcomes at post and
follow-up, and data relating to acceptability or partici-
pant satisfaction with the intervention. Extracted data
were synthesised descriptively. Where possible, effect
sizes and confidence intervals of effect
sizes were
extracted or estimated [29] to examine pooled effect
sizes and risk of publication bias. Publication bias was
intended to be assessed through examination of funnel
plots. The quality of each study was evaluated according
to the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP [30])
guidelines, with extracted data used to grade the level of
evidence of each study according to the Strength of
Recommendation Taxonomy (SORT [31]).

Results
Figure 1 displays the results of the systematic review
article selection process. As our search strategy was
purposefully broad and sensitive, the initial database
search generated 20, 628 results with four additional ar-
ticles identified through the Google Scholar search and
one additional article identified through the ancestral
search. After screening, 23 studies met criteria for inclu-
sion in the review. Data summarising key methods and
intervention effects are contained in Table 1.

Participants, contexts, and design
The 23 studies were conducted with participants across
a range of medical specialties, with family or primary

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 4 of 19

Fig. 1 Flowchart showing results of the systematic review for studies investigating interventions to reduce occupational stress or burnout among
medical doctors

care doctors being the most commonly studied popula-
tion [19, 32–36]. Studies were also conducted among
general hospital-based [26, 37–39], surgical [40–42],
paediatric [43, 44], oncology [45, 46], obstetrics and
gynaecology [47], internal medicine [48, 49], and radi-
ology [27] fields of practice. Two studies utilised sam-
ples of doctors from a range of specialties and work
settings who were accessing the intervention service
through a nationally available programme [25, 50].
The majority (12 of the 23 studies) of research was
conducted in the USA, with only one study [32]
conducted in a developing nation. The studies were
typically underpowered or of small samples size, ran-
ging from 6 [33] to 227 participants [25, 50], with only
eight studies reporting samples greater than 40 partici-
pants [19, 25, 36, 38, 44, 45, 49, 50]. For the 15 studies
with multiple conditions, the average condition size
was 17.67 (SD = 11.77). The majority (67%, n = 10) of
these studies had less than 20 participants per condi-
tion, which limits any interpretations of population
efficacy [51].

randomised controlled trials

Eight studies were conducted as single group pre-
post intervention designs with no comparison condi-
tions [19, 25, 32, 34, 39, 46, 47, 50] and 10 were
(RCTs)
conducted as
[26, 27, 36, 37, 40, 41, 43, 45, 48, 49]. A further five
studies [33, 35, 38, 42, 44] utilised quasi-experimental
designs with non-random allocation of participants to
groups, which was typically based on doctor availability to
participate in intervention activities.

Of the 15 studies that included two or more experi-
mental arms (RCTs and quasi-experimental designs),
only four [33, 36, 40, 49] utilised active control condi-
tions. The remaining studies utilised passive waitlist
control comparators. Such designs are problematic, par-
ticularly when examining occupational stress or burnout,
as the time allocated away from regular duties to under-
take intervention activities may itself facilitate change
rather than any specific intervention strategy. This prob-
lem may be further compounded in those studies that
allowed self-selection of participants to interventions
based on work availability. That is, the doctors electing

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 5 of 19

l

e
b
a
n
u
s
S
E

f

o
s
I
C
d
n
a

s
S
E

l

a
t
n
e
m

r
e
h
t
e
h
w

l

r
a
e
c
n
U

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
b
o
t

e
t
a
l
s
n
a
r
t

l

d
u
o
w
g
n
n
a
r
t

i

i

k
s
a
t

R
V

e
h
t

f

o

e
d
i
s
t
u
o

t
a
e
r
t

o
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
t
n

i

o
N

s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

s
s
e
r
t
s

o
t

d
e
t
c
u
d
n
o
c

l

s
i
s
y
a
n
a

e
z
i
s

l

e
p
m
a
s

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

f

o

g
n
i
t
s
e
t

l

a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

o
N

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

o
N

s
t
c
e
f
f
e

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
b

o
t

l

e
b
a
n
u

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

.

n
o
i
t
u
a
c

h
t
i

w
d
e
t
e
r
p
r
e
t
n

i

o
t

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
d
a

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

l

.
)
y
e
v
i
t
c
e
p
s
e
r

,

8
5

.

d
n
a

n

i

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

s
e
g
n
a
h
C

e
b

l

d
u
o
h
s

s
e
r
o
c
s

,

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

e
t
a
r

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
r

w
o
L

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

%
0
5

s
a
w

l

e
b
a
n
u
s
S
E

f

o
s
I
C
d
n
a

s
S
E

p
u
o
r
g

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

o
N

g
n
i
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

i

s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
d
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

l

e
g
a
r
e
v
a

n
o

a
t
a
d

o
N

p
u
o
r
g

n

i

e
c
n
a
d
n
e
t
t
a

s
p
u
o
r
g

t
n

i
l

a
B

e
h
t

n

i

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

i

y

l
l

a
i
t
n
e
t
o
P

f

o

f
l
a
h

n
a
h
t

s
s
e
L

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
b
o
t

r
e
w
o
p

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

e
r
p
m
o
r
f

,

s
e
i
t
i
l
i

b
a

o
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

f

o

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

f

o

s
g
n
i
t
a
r

i

d
m
y
n
o

l

l
l
i
t
s

h
g
u
o
h
t
l
a

’

s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

n
o

t
s
o
p

o
t

e
e
r
h
t

e
h
t

s
s
o
r
c
A

.
)
s
r
a
e
y

i

r
o
n
e
s

d
n
a

s
r
a
e
y

3
<

3
>

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

s
e
r
o
c
s

,

l

s
e
a
c
s

I

B
M

i

r
o
n
u
j
(

l

e
v
e

l

e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

g
S

i

(cid:129)

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

y
b

d
e
d
v
d

i

i

e
r
e
w
s
n
a
e
M

n
a
h
t

p
u
o
r
g

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
n
a

e
g
a
r
e
v
a

n
o

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

d
n
a

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h
m
u
m
x
a
m

i

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

g
n
i
r
u
d

l

o
s
i
t
r
o
c

g
S

i

.

s
t
n
o
p

i

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

n

i

I

A
T
S

n
o

i

y
t
e
x
n
a

r
e
w
o

l

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

,
r
e
v
e
w
o
H

t
n
a
c
i
f
i

n
g
i
s

t
o
n

e
r
e
w

.

p
u
o
r
g

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

y
b

s
p
u
o
r
g

e
h
t

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

t
n
e
m
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

t
s
o
p

e
h
t

i

.
t
n
o
p

e
m

i
t

y
r
e
g
a
m

i

l

a
t
n
e
m

r
e
h
g
h

i

g
S

i

n
a
h
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

r
o

f

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

h
c
a
e

,

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

l

i

a
c
g
r
u
s

a

i

g
n
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

R
V

a

n
o

e
r
u
d
e
c
o
r
p

e
r
o
f
e
b

n
e
k
a
t
r
e
d
n
u

r
o
t
a
u
m

l

i
s

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

p
u
o
r
g

t
n

i
l

a
B

h

.

5
1
×
9

l

y
h
t
n
o
m
d
e
h

l

,

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

l

e
a
c
s

i

t
n
o
p
-
5

n
o

)
1
3
(

.

f

o

d
n
e

o
t

i

i

g
n
n
n
g
e
b
m
o
r
f

t
s
e
t
e
r

t
s
e
t

,

1
5

.

,

9
4

.

r

r
o
o
p

d
e
w
o
h
s

o
t

y
c
a
c
i
f
f
e
-
f
l
e
s

r
e
t
a
e
r
g

=
s

(

y
t
i
l
i

b
a

i
l

e
r

,

8
8

.

=
d
(

i

e
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c

s
s
e
r
t
s

e
g
a
n
a
m
o
t

y
c
a
c
i
f
f
e

-
f
l
e
s

d
n
a

,

i

e
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c

,

i

e
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c

o
t

s
s
e
r
t
s

o
t

y
c
a
c
i
f
f
e
-
f
l
e
s

r
o

f

d
e
s
u

s

m
e
t
i

l

i

a
n
g
i
r

O

(cid:129)

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

,

0
6

.

=
d
(

s
s
e
r
t
s

s
s
e

l

g
i
s

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

i

e
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c

o
t

s
p
u
o
r
g

l
l

a
m

s

n

i

d
e
r
e
v

i
l

e
d

,

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

g
i
s

,
)
4
0
1

.

o
t

1
2

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

s
k
e
e
w
8

r
e
v
o

)
7
=
n
(

f

o

n
o
i
t
p
e
c
x
e

e
h
t

h
t
i

w

r
a
e
y

g
n
o
m
a

n
o
i
t
a
s
i
l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p
e
d

i

h
c
h
w

,

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

i

r
o
n
u

j

l

a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

o
N

.

d
e
p
p
o
r
d

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

f

o

g
n
i
t
s
e
t

,

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

o
t

e
v
i
t
a
e
R

l

(cid:129)

p
u
o
r
g

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
n
a

i

n
o
i
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c

h
-
0
4

s
l
l
i
k
s

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

s
s
e
r
t
s

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

i

n
o
i
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
C

y
c
a
c
i
f
f
e
-
f
l
e
s

i

n
o
i
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
C

o
t

y
c
a
c
i
f
f
e

f
l
e
S

s
s
e
r
t
s

e
g
a
n
a
m

s
s
e
r
t
s

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

)
s
e
r
i
a
n
n
o
i
t
s
e
u
q

l

i

a
n
g
i
r
o

l
l

a
(

i

l

m
u
g
e
B
/
y
g
o
o
c
n
o

l

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

t
s
i
l
t
i
a
w

r
o

)
7
4
=
n
(

n

i

i

g
n
k
r
o
w
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

0
6
1
2

f

o

(

6
9
=
N

l

i

a
c
d
e
m

)

d
e
t
i
v
n

i

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

.
l

a

t
e

d
r
a
g
a
r
B

)
9
4
=
n
(

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

]
5
4
[

f

o

o
t

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
c
e
p
x
E

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
n
o
c

(cid:129)

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

s
a

s
e
i
t
i
l
i

b
a

n

i

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

l

y
g
o
o
c
n
o

7
1
=
N

l

e
a
r
s
I
/
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

t
s
o
p
-
e
r
p

p
u
o
r
g

l

e
g
n
S

i

n
g
i
s
e
d

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

.
l

a

t
e

l

a
e
S
-
r
a
B

]
6
4
[

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

n

i

s
s
e
r
t
s

r
e
w
o

l

g
S

i

(cid:129)

l

i

a
t
n
e
m
n
m
0
3
×
5

y
r
e
g
a
m

i

l

a
t
n
e
M

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i

m
L

i

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s
/
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

—

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
O

p
u
-
w
o

l
l

o

f

t
s
o
p
—
e
m
o
c
t
u
O

)
s
(
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

I

y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
S

)
s
(
e
m
o
c
t
u
o

)
s
(
e
m
o
c
t
u
o

g
n
i
t
t
e
s

y
r
a
m

i
r
P

/
t
x
e
t
n
o
c

,

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
P

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

l

i

a
c
d
e
m
g
n
o
m
a

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

r
o

s
s
e
r
t
s

g
n
i
t
e
g
r
a
t

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i

f

o

y
r
a
m
m
u
S

1

e
l
b
a
T

n
g
i
s
e
D

y
d
u
t
S

)
l

o
s
i
t
r
o
c

(cid:129)

t
r
a
e
h

,
I

A
T
S
(

s
s
e
r
t
S

y
r
a
v

i
l

a
s

d
n
a

,

e
t
a
r

(cid:129)

K
U
/
s
n
o
e
g
r
u
s

i

e
c
v
o
n

)

n
a
g
e
b

0
2
(

8
1
=
N

)
0
1
=
n
(

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

]
0
4
[

.
l

a

t
e

a
r
o
r
A

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
t
c
a

r
o

)
0
1
=
n
(

)
3
4

.

o
t

.

8
3
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

4
1

.

=
d
(

E
E

f

o

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

.

9
2
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

2
1

.

=
d
(

%
5
9

,

2
0

.

=
d
(

A
P

r
o

,
)
4
5

.

o
t

P
D

,
)
2
5

.

.

7
2
−
=

o
t

I

C

d
n
a

)
1
4
1

.

o
t

5
5

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

e
g
a
n
a
m
o
t

y
c
a
c
i
f
f
e
-
f
l
e
s

%
5
9

,

1
8

.

=
d
(

s
s
e
r
t
s

n
o

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

g
i
s

o
N

)
3
1

.

o
t

5
4

.

=

I

C

(cid:129)

)
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

t
n
e
i
t
a
p

o
t
n

i

e
r
a
c

l

e
a
c
s

y
h
t
a
p
m
e

i

n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

n
o

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

g
i
s

o
N

(cid:129)

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
o
h
c
y
s
p

e
t
a
r
g
e
t
n

i

e
h
t

o
t

g
n
i
t
a
e
r

l

;

9

d
n
a

o
t

y
t
i
c
a
p
a
c

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

’

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

n

i

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

g
i
s

I

B
M

l

a
t
o
t

r
o

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

l

a
t
o
t

n

i

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

g
i
s

o
N

n
o

o
N

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

n

i

y
t
i
l
i

b
a

d
n
a

t
s
e
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
t
c
u
d
n
o
c

,

s
p
u
o
r
g

t
n

i
l

a
B

f

o

h
c
a
e

,

h
t
n
o
m

r
e
p

e
c
n
o

r
a
e
y
-
1

r
e
v
o

,

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

h
-
1

d
o
i
r
e
p

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

l

g
i
s

l

e
v
e

l

m
e
t
i

t
a

r
e
v
e
w
o
h

,

8

,

7
(

s

m
e
t
i

3

n
o

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

,

i

i

e
n
c
d
e
m

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
o
h
c
y
s
p

d
n
a

t
s
e
r
e
t
n

I

n

i

y
t
i
l
i

b
a

i

l

a
c
g
o
o
h
c
y
s
p

i

i

e
n
c
d
e
m

i

n
a
c
i
s
y
h
P

y
h
t
a
p
m
e

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

)

d
e
t
i
v
n

i

6
3

f

o

(

7
1
=
N

t
s
o
p
-
e
r
p

,

p
u
o
r
g

l

e
g
n
S

i

d
n
a

s
c
i
r
t
e
t
s
b
o

A
S
U
/
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

l

y
g
o
o
c
e
a
n
y
g

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

.
l

a

t
e

i
t
t
e
h
G

]
7
4
[

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 6 of 19

e
c
n
a
d
n
e
t
t
a

n
o

a
t
a
d

o
N

r
e
w
o
p

l

a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

k
a
e
W

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

t
a

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
b

o
t

l

e
b
a
n
u

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
P

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

o
N

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

d
e
n

i
f
e
d

y
l
r
o
o
P

g
n

i
l
l

e
s
n
u
o
c

t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

o
w

t

e
h
t

f

o

s
t
c
e
f
f
E

t
o
n

s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

l

y
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
g
i
t
s
e
v
n

i

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

e
m
o
S

n

i

d
e
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

i

e
h
t

r
e
t
f
a

y
p
a
r
e
h
t
o
h
c
y
s
p

t
o
n

t
c
e
f
f
e

,

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

s
e
s
y
a
n
a

l

n

i

r
o

f

d
e
t
n
u
o
c
c
a

s
r
u
o
h
-
k
r
o
w
n

i

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
R

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

s
d
n
u
o
n
o
c

f

t
o
n

d
n
a

t
c
e
f
f
e

r
o

f

d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

o
N

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

d
e
n

i
f
e
d

y
l
r
o
o
P

s
r
u
o
h
-
k
r
o
w
n

i

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
R

l

y
e
t
a
r
a
p
e
s

d
e
t
a
g
i
t
s
e
v
n

i

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

s
d
n
u
o
n
o
c

f

g
n

i
l
l

e
s
n
u
o
c

t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

o
w

t

e
h
t

f

o

s
t
c
e
f
f
E

t
o
n

s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

t
o
n

d
n
a

t
c
e
f
f
e

r
o

f

d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

%
0
9

d
n
a

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

e
r
u
t
u
f

a

e
b

o
t

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

d
n
u
o

f

o
t

d
n
e
m
m
o
c
e
r

l

d
u
o
w

l

a
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

f

o

e
c
r
u
o
s

t
r
o
p
p
u
s

l

i

a
c
o
s

d
n
a

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

n
o

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

h
c
a
e

,

s
k
e
e
w
8

r
e
v
o

l

d
e
h

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
n
a

I

B
M

l

a
t
o
t

r
o

y
b

d
e

l

,

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

h
-
1

f

o

i

r
o
n
e
s

d
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

l

a
n
o
i
s
s
e
f
o
r
p

h
t
l
a
e
h

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
q

d
n
a

)
s
p
u
o
r
g

s
u
c
o

f

e
r
i
a
n
n
o
i
t
s
e
u
q

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

l

i

a
n
g
i
r
o

(

h
t
i

w

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

r
a
e
y

t
s
r
i
f

l

e
g
n
i
s

a

n

i

d
e
s
a
b

n
a
t
i
l

o
p
o
r
t
e
m

a

i
l

a
r
t
s
u
A
/
l
a
t
i
p
s
o
h

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

t
s
i
l
t
i
a
w

r
o

)
8
1
=
n
(

)
3
1
=
n
(

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

]
6
2
[

.
l

a

%
0
6

—
d
e
v
e
c
e
r

i

l
l

e
W

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

n

i

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

g
i
s

o
N

(cid:129)

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

g
n

i
f
e
i
r
b
e
d

r
u
o
F

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

(cid:129)

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

)

d
e
t
i
v
n

i

2
5

f

o

(

1
3
=
N

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

t
e
m
a
g
n
i
s
a
n
u
G

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

(

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

l

i

a
c
d
e
m
g
n
o
m
a

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

r
o

s
s
e
r
t
s

g
n
i
t
e
g
r
a
t

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i

f

o

y
r
a
m
m
u
S

1

e
l
b
a
T

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

i

d
e
t
c
d
e
r
p

%
5
9

,

8
2

.

=
d
(

y
l
t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

i

P
D

,
)
7
7

.

o
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

3
3

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

E
E

n

i

o
t

6
0

.

=

I

C

A
P

d
n
a

%
5
9

,

8
0

.

,
)
9
4

.

=
d
(

o
t

.

3
1
−
=

r
e
v
e
w
o
h

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
v
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
D

)
r
a
e
y

1

t
A

g
S

i

(

(cid:129)

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

-
t
s
o
p

o
N

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

l

e
a
m
g
n
o
m
a

n

i

s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

p
u
-
w
o

l
l

o

f

h
t
n
o
m
-
2
1

l

y
n
o

)

h

=
d
(

e
h
t

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

,

5
5

.

E
E

g
n

i
l
l

e
s
n
u
o
c

l

i

a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

i

g
n
p
o
c

d
e
s
u
c
o

f

f

o

e
n
o

e
s
o
h
c

s
r
o
t
c
o
D

s
s
e
r
t
s
i
d

l

a
t
n
e
M

a

:

s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

o
w

t

7
–
6
(

y
a
d

l

e
g
n
i
s

s
s
e
r
t
s

b
o
J

n
o
i
t
o
m
E

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

g
n

i
l
l

e
s
n
u
o
c

g
n
i
t
a
v
i
t
o
m

t
a

d
e
m
a

i

y
a
d
-
5

r
o

n
o
i
s
s
e
s

d
e
s
a
b
-
p
u
o
r
g

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

’

e
h
t

n
o

n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
r

e
v
i
t
c
a

d
n
a

i

g
n
p
o
c

m

s
i
c
i
t
o
r
u
e
N

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
S

e
v
a
e

l

k
c
S

i

h
t
i

w

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

4
4

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

n
o
i
t
o
m
e

d
e
s
u
c
o

f

,
)
7
8

.

o
t

d
n
a

i

g
n
p
o
c

m

s
i
c
i
t
o
r
u
e
n

n

i

e
g
n
a
h
c

g
i
s

o
N

i

g
n
p
o
c

e
v
i
t
c
a

n
o

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

r
e
w
e
f

g
S

i

k
c
i
s

e
m

i
t

l
l

u
f

e
v
a
e

l

,

E
E

n

i

e
g
n
a
h
c

)
s
r
a
e
y

3

t
A

g
i
s

o
N

i

g
n
p
o
c

e
v
i
t
c
a

d
n
a

,

i

g
n
p
o
c

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

g
S

i

m

s
i
c
i
t
o
r
u
e
n n

i

o
t

1
m
o
r
f

o
t

1
m
o
r
f

s
r
a
e
y

3

,

s
s
e
r
t
s

b
o

j

n
o
i
t
o
m
e

d
e
s
u
c
o

f

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

s
r
a
e
y

3

m
o
r
F

(cid:129)

t
e

n
o
s
s
k
a
s
I
(

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

.
l

a

r
a
e
y
-
3

o
t

)
]
5
2
[

g
i
s

,

p
u
-
w
o

l
l

o

f

n

i

s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

,

0
7

.

=
d
(

E
E

n

i

s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

l

a
t
n
e
m

.
)
9
2

.

g
S

i

(cid:129)

,

5
6

.

=
d
(

s
s
e
r
t
s

b
o

j

,

s
s
e
r
t
s
i
d

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
-
t
s
o
p

o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o

:

s
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

o
w

t

f

o

e
n
o

e
s
o
h
c

s
r
o
t
c
o
D

s
s
e
r
t
s

b
o
J

n
o
i
t
o
m
E

’

n
o
i
t
a
u
t
i
s

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

e
h
t

n
o

n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
r

g
n
i
t
a
v
i
t
o
m

.

s
d
e
e
n

l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p

d
n
a

g
n

i
l
l

e
s
n
u
o
c

d
e
s
a
b
-
p
u
o
r
g

t
a

d
e
m
a

i

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

g
n

i
l
l

e
s
n
u
o
c

l

i

a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

y
a
d
-
5

r
o

n
o
i
s
s
e
s

e
v
i
t
c
a

d
n
a

i

g
n
p
o
c

m

s
i
c
i
t
o
r
u
e
N

e
v
a
e

l

k
c
S

i

)

h

7
–
6
(

y
a
d

l

e
g
n
i
s

a

i

g
n
p
o
c

d
e
s
u
c
o

f

I

C

.

s
d
e
e
n

l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

5
8
1
(

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

7
2
2
=
N

,

n
g
i
s
e
d

p
u
o
r
g

l

e
g
n
S

i

-

w
o

l
l

o

f

l

d
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

r
o

f

d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
-
f
l
e
s

)

p
u

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

g
n

i
l
l

e
s
n
u
o
c

-
e
r
p

n
e
k
a
t

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

i

g
n
w
o

l
l

o

f

r
a
e
y

1

d
n
a

i
s
a
u
Q

.

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

,

5
0
0
2

d
n
a

3
0
0
2

o
t

p
u
o
r
g

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

a
t
a
d

h
t
i

w
d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

0
9
3

f

o

y
e
v
r
u
s

m
o
r
f

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

i

n
a
g
e
w
r
o
N

/
3
0
0
2

n

i

d
e
t
c
u
d
n
o
c

y
a
w
r
o
N

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

i

n
a
g
e
w
r
o
N

f

o

l

e
p
m
a
s

l

a
r
e
n
e
g

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

7
2
2
=
N

l

d
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

4
8
1
(

-
f
l
e
s

)

p
u
-
w
o

l
l

o

f

r
o

f

d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r

g
n

i
l
l

e
s
n
u
o
c

y
a
w
r
o
N
/
5
0
0
2

d
n
a

3
0
0
2

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

,

n
g
i
s
e
d

p
u
o
r
g

l

e
g
n
S

i

e
h
t

i

g
n
w
o

l
l

o

f

s
r
a
e
y

3

n
e
k
a
t

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

n

i

d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d

.
l

a

t
e

n
o
s
s
k
a
s
I

]
5
2
[

.
l

a

t
e

n
o
s
s
k
a
s
I

]
0
5
[

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 7 of 19

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

o
N

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

w
o

l

e
c
n
a
d
n
e
t
t
a

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

)

h

2
5

l

e
b
i
s
s
o
p

f

o

.

6
3
3
(

n

i

d
e
r
o
p
x
e

l

t
o
n

d
n
a

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

o
t

n
o
i
t
a
e
r

l

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o

r
o

e
s
a
h
p

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

o
N

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

r
o

f

l

d
e
t
a
u
c
a
c

l

e
b

o
t

l

e
b
a

i

t
n
o
p

e
m

i
t

t
s
o
p

t
o
n

s
s
e
r
t
s

f

o

e
r
u
s
a
e
M

l

t
n
e
a
v
u
q
e

i

t
o
n

s
p
u
o
r
G

d
e
t
a
d

i
l

a
v

t
a

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h

r
o

s
s
e
r
t
s

n
o

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

t
n
e
m
n
g
i
s
s
a
m
o
d
n
a
r
-
n
o
N

w
o
l
/
e
p
m
a
s

l

l
l

a
m
S

r
e
w
o
p

l

a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

f

o

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

d
n
a

i

n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

n

i

s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

g
S

i

d
(

A
P

n
o

)
4
4

.

=

,

l

s
s
e
n
u
f
d
n
m

i

,

y
h
t
a
p
m
e

y
t
i
l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p

5

g
B

i

d
n
a

)

%
0
6
≥
e
r
o
c
s
(

e
r
e
w
y
e
h
t

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

d
e
i
f
s
i
t
a
s

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
h
t

h
t
i

w

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

f

o
%
1
8

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)
8
9

.

o
t

5
5

.

=

I

C

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)
s
h
t
n
o
m
3

t
A

s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

m
o
r
f
(

g
S

i

(

(cid:129)

%
5
9

,

7
7

.

s
s
e
r
t
s

b
o

j

=
d
(

n
o

)
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

,
)
2
6

)
5
4

.

.

=
d
(

=
d
(

E
E

P
D

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)
s
k
e
e
w
4

t
A

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

g
S

i

r
o

f

s
s
e
r
t
s

n

i

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

d
e
t
r
o
p
p
u
s
n
u

o
t

d
e
s
o
p
x
e

)

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

f

o

n
o
i
s
r
e
v

s
e
g
n
a
h
C

r
e
t
f
a
(

i

d
e
n
a
m
e
r

I

B
M

f

o

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

-

w
o

l
l

o

f

t
a

g
i
s

p
u

n
o

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

l

s
e
a
c
s

l

a
t
o
t

y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
s

r
o

f

-
o
t

-
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o

s
e
g
n
a
h
C

g
i
s

i

d
e
n
a
m
e
r

p
u
-
w
o

l
l

o

f

t
a

t
s
o
p

(cid:129)

(

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

i

d
e
n
a
t
n
a
m

i

r
o

f

e
h
t

d
e
t
a
r

s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

f

o
%
1
9

(cid:129)

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

n
o

s
t
c
e
f
f
e

t
n
a
c
i
f
i

n
g
i
s

o
N

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

n
o

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

p
u
o
r
g

g
i
s

o
N

(cid:129)

l

i

l

a
c
g
o
o
i
s
y
h
p

a
i
r
e
t
i
r
c

t
e
m

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p
%
0
3

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
d
a

”
d
o
o
g
“

r
o

f

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

)
5
5

.

o
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
h
t

d
e
t
a
r

%
0
0
1

r
o

,

d
o
o
g

y
r
e
v

,

d
o
o
g

s
a

t
n
e

l
l

e
c
x
e

,

l

e
b
a
u
a
v

l

s
a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

i

g
n
d
u
c
n

l

i

,

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
y
n
a

)
6
5

.

=
d
(

r
o

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

p
u
o
r
g

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

)
y
l
k
e
e
w
d
e
h

l

,

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

)
9
3

.

=
d
(

I

A
T
S

e
h
t

n
o

n
o
i
t
a
c
i
f
i
t
n
e
d

i

n
o

g
n
i
s
u
c
o

f

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
i
r
a
v

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h

f

o

t
n
e
m
p
o
e
v
e
d

l

d
n
a

s
r
e
g
g
i
r
t

f

o

e
r
u
s
a
e
m

(

s
s
e
r
t
S

t
r
a
e
h

,
I

A
T
S

y
b

(cid:129)

s
s
e
r
t
s

e
v
i
t
c
e
b
u
s

j

d
n
a

,

e
t
a
r

l

)
e
a
c
s

l

i

a
c
g
r
u
s

6
2
=
N

A
S
U
/
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

I

B
M
n

i

,

1
0

.

<
d
(

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

g
i
s

o
N

)
s
h
t
n
o
m
6

t
A

(

(cid:129)

E
E

f

o

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

.

7
3
1
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

P
D

,
)
4
7

.

o
t

.

5
7
−
=

,

.

9
5
−
=
d
(

I

C
%
5
9

,

.

8
0
−
=
d
(

)
7
6

.

o
t

A
P

r
o

.

2
8
−
=

,
)
8
1

.

o
t

I

C
%
5
9

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
E

,

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

7

f

o

g
n
i
t
s
i
s
n
o
c

,

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

i

n
m
-
0
6

f

o

h
c
a
e

s
l
l
i
k
s

T
B
C

n
o

g
n
i
s
s
u
c
o

f

e
v
i
t
i
n
g
o
c

s
a

h
c
u
s

d
n
a

g
n
i
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
e
r

n
o
i
t
a
x
a
e
r

l

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
S

(cid:129)

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

y

l
i

m
a
f

3
3
=
N

,

n
g
i
s
e
d

p
u
o
r
g

l

e
g
n
S

i

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

h
t
i

w

i

/
s
n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

t
p
y
g
E

n
e
k
a
t

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

-
t
s
o
p

d
n
a

-
e
r
p

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

]
2
3
[

.
l

a

t
e

b
t
o
K

.
l

a

t
e

r
e
n
s
a
r
K

]
9
1
[

E
E

n
o

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

g
S

i

A
P

t
o
n

t
u
b

,

P
D
d
n
a

I

B
M

f

o

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

l

a
t
o
t

n

i

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

g
S

i

d
n
a

e
c
n
a
b
r
u
t
s
i
d

d
o
o
m

s
f
e

i
l

e
b

i

n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

)
e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
a
m

i

t
s
o
P
(

s
r
e
k
r
a
M

-
i
n
M

i

s
s
e
r
t
s

n

i

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

.

9
1
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

4
4

.

=
d
(

g
S

i

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

r
o

f

)
7
0
1

.

o
t

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

t
o
n

t
u
b

p
u
o
r
g

d
o
o
b

l

n

,

1
0

.

<
d

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h

,
)
3
8

.

o
t

%
5
9

,

1
2

.

=
d

,

2
6

.

o
t

.

2
6
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

c

i
l

o
t
s
y
s
(

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

c

i
l

o
t
s
a
d

i

.

1
4
−
=

I

C

l

o
s
i
t
r
o
c

y
r
a
v

i
l

a
s

r
o

,
)
0
8

.

o
t

.

9
6
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

7
0

.

=
d
(

.

4
4
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

8
1

.

=
d
(

i

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

g
i
s

o
N

p
u
o
r
g

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

e
v
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

k
e
e
w
-
8

h
t
i

w

d
n
a

)
l
a
t
o
t

h

7
2
(

d
o
i
r
e
p

i

e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
a
m
h
t
n
o
m
-
0
1

n
o
i
s
s
e
s

h
-
5
2
(

.

d
o
i
r
e
p

)

h
t
n
o
m
h
c
a
e

i

n
o
i
t
a
c
n
u
m
m
o
c

d
n
a

,

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

t
u
o
b
a

s
f
e

i
l

e
B

l

i

a
c
o
s
o
h
c
y
s
p

e
r
a
c

t
n
e
i
t
a
p

y
t
i
l

a
n
o
s
r
e
P

s
e
t
a
t
s

d
o
o
M

f

o

s
t
c
e
p
s
a

i

n
a
c
i
s
y
h
P

y
h
t
a
p
m
E

d
n
a

,

p
u
o
r
g

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

y
a
d

r
e
p

s
e
m

i
t

3

e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

.

h
c
a
e

i

n
m
5

r
o

f

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

k
c
a
b
d
e
e
f
o
B

i

,

s
y
a
d

8
2

r
e
v
o

d
e
r
e
v

i
l

e
d

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
d
A

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
H

,
)

i

n
m
0
3
(

p
o
h
s
k
r
o
w
1

h
t
i

w

r
o

f

s
g
n
i
t
e
e
m
y
l
k
e
e
w
e
c
w

i

t

e
r
u
s
s
e
r
p

d
o
o
B

l

l

o
s
i
t
r
o
c

y
r
a
v

i
l

a
S

,

s
s
e
n
e
r
a
w
a

,

l

s
s
e
n
u
f
d
n
M

i

l

s
s
e
n
u
f
d
n
M

i

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

s
s
e
r
t
S

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

(cid:129)

h

3
×
3
(

s
p
o
h
s
k
r
o
w

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

f

o

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

1
7
8

f

o

(

0
7
=
N

,

n
g
i
s
e
d

p
u
o
r
g

l

e
g
n
S

i

i

d
e
d
v
o
r
p

1
5

,

d
e
t
i
v
n

i

t
s
a

l

t
a

a
t
a
d

y
r
a
m

i
r
p

)
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

a

n

i

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

e
r
a
c

i

a
c
d
e
m
g
n
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

i

e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
a
m

i

t
s
o
p

,

d
o
i
r
e
p

e
v
i
s
n
e
t
n

i

n
e
k
a
t

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

t
s
o
p

,
)
2
×

(

-
e
r
p

s
h
t
n
o
m
3

d
n
a

,

d
o
i
r
e
p

m
o
r
f

s

m
e
t
i

g
n
i
s
u

s
s
e
r
t
s

d
e
t
a
d

i
l

a
v

)
s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

y
l
s
u
o
v
e
r
p

i

e
r
i
a
n
n
o
i
t
s
e
u
q

d
e
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c

l

y
e
s
o
p
r
u
p

(

s
s
e
r
t
S

(cid:129)

l

A
S
U

/
e
s
r
u
o
c

n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

i

g
n
w
o

l
l

o

f

i

/
s
n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

d
e
s
a
b

l

a
t
i
p
s
o
h

0
4
=
N

a
d
a
n
a
C

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

.
l

a

t
e

e
r
i
a
m
e
L

)
1
2
=
n
(

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

]
7
3
[

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
C

.
)
9
1
=
n
(

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

t
s
i
l
t
i
a
w

r
o

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

i

d
e
v
e
c
e
r

p
u
-
w
o

l
l

o

f

g
n
i
r
u
d

.

d
o
i
r
e
p

,

d
e
h
c
t
a
m

,

d
e
d
n

i
l

B

.
l

a

t
e

r
e
h
a
M

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w

,

n
g
i
s
e
d

l

a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e
-
i
s
a
u
q

]
2
4
[

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

o
t

r
o

)
1
1
=
n
(

8
4

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

d
n
a

,
)
3
9

.

o
t

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

(

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

l

i

a
c
d
e
m
g
n
o
m
a

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

r
o

s
s
e
r
t
s

g
n
i
t
e
g
r
a
t

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i

f

o

y
r
a
m
m
u
S

1

e
l
b
a
T

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 8 of 19

t
u
b

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

T
T

I

f

o

e
s
U

l

e
p
m
a
s

l

n
o
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

l

a
n

i
f

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

e
z
i
s

s
p
u
o
r
g

f
i

l

r
a
e
c
n
U

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

t
a

l

t
n
e
a
v
u
q
e

i

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

s
V
D
n
o

i

n
o
i
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p
/
e
c
n
e
r
e
h
d
A

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
S

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

t
o
n

d
e
t
a
d

i
l

a
v
-
n
U

e
r
i
a
n
n
o
i
t
s
e
u
q

n

i

t
p
o
w
o
L

d
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

y
c
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
c

l

a
n
r
e
t
n

i

r
o
o
P

d
n
a

i

n
a
r
t
s

k
r
o
w

r
o

f

h
t
i

w
d
e
t
a
c
o
s
s
a

i

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

s
g
n

i
l

e
e
f

t
l
i

u
g

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

m
o
r
f

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

n
o
i
t
a
c
o

l
l

a
m
o
d
n
a
r
-
n
o
N

s
g
n
d
n

i

i
f

s
t
i

m

i
l

l

e
b
a
n
u
s
S
E

f

o
s
I
C
d
n
a

s
S
E

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
b
o
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n
i
-
e
r
P

l

e
b
a
n
u
s
S
E

f

o
s
I
C
d
n
a

s
S
E

l

a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
b
o
t

r
e
w
o
p

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
P

d
e
h
s
i
l

b
a
t
s
e

t
o
n

l

a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

m
u
m
n
M

i

i

s
p
u
o
r
g

f

o

l

y
c
n
e
a
v
u
q
e

i

n

i

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

l
i

a
t
e
d

r
o

s

M
p
u
o
r
g

o
n

(

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

)
s
D
S

l

e
b
a
n
u
s
S
E

f

o
s
I
C
d
n
a

s
S
E

n
o
i
t
a
c
o

l
l

a
m
o
d
n
a
r
-
n
o
N

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
b
o
t

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
p
o
h
s
k
r
o
w

t
a

e
c
n
a
d
n
e
t
t
a

e
g
a
r
e
v
A

e
z
i
s

l

e
p
m
a
s

l
l

a
m
S

s
g
n
d
n

i

i
f

s
t
i

m

i
l

g
n
i
t
r
o
p
e
r

o
t

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
d
a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

f

o

e
g
a
s
u

s
r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

o
t

s
l
l
i
k
s

e
c
n
a
d
n
e
t
t
a
/
n
o
i
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
P

i

i

t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p
w
o
L

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

o
N

s
I
C

m
o
r
f

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

.

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

l

s
i
s
y
a
n
a

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
q

r
o

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
q

l

a
m
r
o

f

o
n

h
g
u
o
h
t
l
a

,

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
e
t
a
c
d
n

i

i

s
n
o
i
t
a
u
a
v
E

l

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

I

B
M
n
o

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

g
i
s

s
s
e
r
t
s

n

i

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

g
S

i

o
N

)
s
k
e
e
w
8

t
A

(

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

h
-
4

f

o

p
o
h
s
k
r
o
w

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p

g
n
i
s
i
s
a
h
p
m
e

l

y
n
o

(

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

s
s
e
r
t
S

e
f
i
L

(cid:129)

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

)
I
S
S
E
(

s
s
e
r
t
S

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

,

i

i

e
n
c
d
e
m
n

i

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

m
o
d
n
a
r
-
n
o
n

,
l

a
i
r
t

d
n
a

,

s
c
i
r
t
a
d
e
a
p

i

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

f

o

n
o
i
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

4
6
=
N

l

a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e
-
i
s
a
u
Q

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

,

i

p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
e
r

l

,
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

y
b

l

d
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

i

-
e
n
c
d
e
m

i

s
l
l
i
k
s

i

a
n
m
a
t
s

d
n
a

,

k
o
o
l
t
u
o

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

)
s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

i

A
S
U
/
s
c
i
r
t
a
d
e
a
p

i

)
3
4
=
n
(

e
h
t

o
t

l

e
b
a

l
i

a
v
a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

d
n
a

)
1
2
=
n
(

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

l

e
b
a

l
i

a
v
a
n
u

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
h
t

o
t

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)
s
h
t
n
o
m
6

t
A

)
8
8

.

o
t

4
0

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

6
4

.

s
g
n

i
l

e
e
f

t
l
i

u
g

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

)
0
9

.

o
t

6
0

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

8
4

.

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

=
d
(

d
n
a

=
d
(

g
S

i

,

l

e
g
d
e
w
o
n
k

n

i

s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

g
S

i

d
e
r
t
n
e
c

t
n
e
i
t
a
p

,

s
n
o
i
t
n
e
t
n

i

m
e
e
t
s
e
-
f
l
e
s

d
n
a

,

s
e
d
u
t
i
t
t
a

s
t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

r
e
t
a
e
r
g

g
S

i

e
v
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n

i

r
o

f

s
n
o
i
t
n
e
t
n

i

d
n
a
m
e
e
t
s
e
-
f
l
e
s

n
o

s
p
u
o
r
g

h
t
o
b

r
o

f

p
u
o
r
g

i

g
n
n
r
a
e

l

(

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

r
e
p

e
c
n
o

s
p
o
h
s
k
r
o
W

r
e
v
o

h

6
–
4

r
o

f

k
e
e
w

.

d
o
i
r
e
p

k
e
e
w
-
2
1

h
c
a
o
r
p
p
a

l

i

a
c
o
s
o
h
c
y
s
p

.

e
r
a
c

t
n
e
i
t
a
p

o
t

)

i

g
n
h
c
a
e
t

l

i

a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

-
o
b

i

n

i

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n

i

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

s
s
e
r
t
s

i

s
e
u
q
n
h
c
e
t

,

s
p
u
o
r
g

t
n

i
l

a
B

,

y
a
p

l

l

e
o
r
(

e
v
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n

i

r
o

c
i
t
c
a
d
D

i

A
/
N

r
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

d
e
d
n

i
l

b

(

d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a
-
f
l
e
s

d
n
a

e
c
n
a
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

)
S
T
A
S
O
n
o

l

i

a
c
g
r
u
S

(cid:129)

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
M

l

e
g
d
e
w
o
n
K

s
n
o
i
t
n
e
t
n

I

s
e
d
u
t
i
t
t
A

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

d
e
s
s
e
s
s
a

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

n
o
i
t
a
n
b
m
o
c

i

a

y
b

n
w
a
r
d

s

m
e
t
i

f

o

i

y
l
s
u
o
v
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

f

o

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

d
e
h
s
i
l

b
u
p

)
t
u
o
n
r
u
b

i

g
n
d
u
c
n

l

i
(

l

e
a
r
s
I
/
s
r
e
n
o
i
t
i
t
c
a
r
p

r
o

)
2
2
=
n
(

c
i
t
c
a
d
d

i

l

a
r
e
n
e
g

)

d
e
t
i
v
n

i

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

l

y
m
o
d
n
a
r

)
2
2
=
n
(

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
v
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n

i

s
n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
p

)
5
1
=
n
(

2
0
1

f

o

(

4
4
=
N

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

.
l

a

t
e

t
i
l

a
g
r
a
M

]
6
3
[

d
n
a

e
u
C
c
M

]
4
4
[

s
h
c
a
S

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

(

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

l

i

a
c
d
e
m
g
n
o
m
a

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

r
o

s
s
e
r
t
s

g
n
i
t
e
g
r
a
t

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i

f

o

y
r
a
m
m
u
S

1

e
l
b
a
T

%
5
9

,

.

4
1
1
=
d
(

s
s
e
r
t
s

,
)
3
3
1

.

o
t

%
5
9

,

7
4

.

)
5
9

.

o
t

.

0
3
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

3
3

.

=
d
(

P
D

r
o

)
0
1
1

.

o
t

.

6
1
−
=

I

C

=
d
(

E
E

r
o

f

s
e
g
n
a
h
c

n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

,

2
6

.

=
d
(

A
P

o
t

7
4

.

=

I

C

d
n
a

,
)
1
8
1

.

l
l

a

n

i

s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

g
S

i

s
l
l
i
k
s

l

s
s
e
n
u
f
d
n
m

i

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)
s
k
e
e
w
8

t
A

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

g
S

i

(

(cid:129)

d
n
a

)
0
2
1

.

o
t

.

7
0
−
=

,

7
5

.

=
d
(

A
P

n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

5
0

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

g
i
s

o
N

.
)
4
5
1

.

o
t

3
2

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

s
o
e
d
v

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

,

9
6

.

=
d
(

E
E

n

i

,

8
8

.

=
d
(

s
s
e
r
t
s

n

i

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

,
)

h
c
a
e

i

n
m
0
9
(

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)
s
h
t
n
o
m
3

t
A

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

g
i
s

o
N

I

B
M
n
o

e
m

i
t

r
e
v
o

r
o

s
p
u
o
r
g

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

n

i

E
E

r
e
w
o

l

g
S

i

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

n
a
h
t

p
u
o
r
g

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

t
s
o
p

t
a

(

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

i

g
S

i

(cid:129)

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

l

s
s
e
n
u
f
d
n
M

i

.

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

h
-
1

f

o

I

C
%
5
9

e
v

i
l

3

a
v

i

d
e
r
e
v

i
l

e
d

y
r
o
t
a
r
i
p
s
e
R

g
n
i
s
u

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

.
)

M
O
R
(

d
o
h
t
e
M
e
n
O

4

n

i

n
o
i
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
P

i

,

y
l
k
e
e
w
d
e
h

l

,

s
p
o
h
s
k
r
o
w

(cid:129)

)

h
c
a
e

h

1
(

s
l
l

a
c

i

g
n
h
c
a
o
c

.

s
k
e
e
w
8

r
e
v
o

d
e
r
e
v

i
l

e
d

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
n
o
c
e
e
t

l

y
l
k
e
e
w

d
n
a

,
)

h
c
a
e

e
n

i
l

n
o

8

i

n
m
7
–
5
(

,
l

o
o
t

c
i
t
u
e
p
a
r
e
h
t
o
h
c
y
s
p

s
t
n
e
r
r
e
t
e
d

d
n
a

E
H
T
A
B

f

o

e
s
u

,

s
s
e
n
e
v
i
t
c
e
f
f
e

s
s
e
n
e
r
a
w
a

n
o

g
n
i
s
u
c
o

f

e
s
i
t
c
a
r
p

d
e
g
a
r
u
o
c
n
E

.

y
h
t
a
p
m
e
-
f
l
e
s

d
n
a

k
e
e
w

r
e
p

s
e
m

i
t

3

l

o
o
t

f

o

.

s
h
t
n
o
m
3

t
x
e
n

r
o

f

E
H
T
A
B

f

o

i

e
u
q
n
h
c
e
t

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
q

(

i

)
s
w
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
s
u
o
h

i

c
i
r
t
a
d
e
a
p

A
S
U
/
s
r
e
c
i
f
f

o

n
o
i
t
a
t
i
d
e
m
/
n
o
i
t
a
x
a
e
R

l

A
/
N

E
E
(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

y

l
i

m
a
f

4
2
=
N

n

i

)

i

n
m
5
4
(

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n

I

,

y
t
i
l
i
t

U

(cid:129)

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

)

d
e
t
i
v
n

i

3
3

f

o

(

5
1
=
N

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

.
l

a

t
e

i

n
e
t
s
l
i

M

)
8
=
n
(

r
o

)
7
=
n
(

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

t
s
i
l
t
i
a
w

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

]
3
4
[

e
s
u

i

t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
P

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

f

o

s
t
c
e
p
s
a

s
l
l
i
k
s

l

s
s
e
n
u
f
d
n
M

i

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

)
S
S
P
(

s
s
e
r
t
S

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

l

a
t
i
p
s
o
h

y
t
i
n
u
m
m
o
c

)

d
e

l
l

o
r
n
e

y

l
l

i

a
n
g
i
r
o

A
S
U
/
s
n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

i

-

w
o

l
l

o

f

k
e
e
w
-
8

h
t
i

w

(

n
g
i
s
e
d

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

)

p
u

3
2

f

o

(

9
1
=
N

t
s
o
p
-
e
r
p

p
u
o
r
g

l

e
g
n
S

i

)
I
B
M

f

o

l

e
a
c
s
b
u
s

/
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

m
o
d
n
a
r
-
n
o
n

,
l

a
i
r
t

A
S
U

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

f

o

n
o
i
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

]
5
3
[

)
4
1
=
n
(

e
h
t

o
t

l

e
b
a

l
i

a
v
a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

d
n
a

)
0
1
=
n
(

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

l

e
b
a

l
i

a
v
a
n
u

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
h
t

o
t

l

a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e
-
i
s
a
u
Q

r
e
r
e
m
m
a
K

i

-
a
n
p
s
O

i

l

y
e
g
F
d
n
a

n
e
s
i
e
g
u
l
f
P

]
9
3
[

.
l

a

t
e

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 9 of 19

s
e
s
y
a
n
a

l

l

e
v
e

l

p
u
o
r
g

o
N

r
o

e
c
n
a
c
i
f
i

n
g
i
s

f

o

s
e
s
y
a
n
a

l

l

e
v
e

l

l

i

a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

l

e
b
a
n
u
s
S
E

f

o
s
I
C
d
n
a

s
S
E

f

o

s
k
c
e
h
c

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

o
N

e
z
i
s

l

e
p
m
a
s

l
l

a
m
S

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
b
o
t

e
g
n
a
h
c

l

a
c
n

i

i
l

c

f

o

l

e
c
n
e
a
v
u
q
e

i

n
o
i
t
a
c
o

l
l

a
m
o
d
n
a
r
-
n
o
N

s
g
n
d
n

i

i
f

s
t
i

m

i
l

n
o
i
t
a
c
o

l
l

a
m
o
d
n
a
r
-
n
o
N

s
g
n
d
n

i

i
f

s
t
i

m

i
l

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
B

n
o

s
p
u
o
r
g

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

n
e
e
s

s
t
n
e
i
t
a
p

f

o

r
e
b
m
u
n

d
n
a

,
t
u
o
n
r
u
b

,

k
e
e
w

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

r
e
p

b
o

j

.

d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
P

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
P

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

m
o
r
f

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

d
n
a

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
p
u
o
r
g

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

n
o
i
t
i
r
t
t
a

l

a
i
t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D

t
o
n

e
z
i
s

l

e
p
m
a
s

i
r
o
i
r
p
A

n
o
i
t
i
r
t
t
a

i

g
n
d
r
a
g
e
r

a
t
a
d

l

e
t
e
p
m
o
c
n

I

d
e
h
c
a
e
r

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
P

m
o
r
f

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

l

s
s
e
n
u
f
d
n
m

i

t
p
e
c
x
e

s
l
l
i
k
s

i

g
n
v
r
e
s
b
o

t
r
o
p
p
u
s

i

t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

r
e
g
n
o
r
t
S

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

l
l

a

r
o

f

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

e
h
t

f

o

e
u
a
v

l

e
h
t

r
o

f

t
n

i
l

a
B

e
h
t

r
o

f

n
a
h
t

p
u
o
r
g

p
u
o
r
g

d
e
r
r
e
f
e
r
p

t
s
o
m

s
t
n
e
n
o
p
m
o
C

,

n
o
i
t
r
e
s
s
a

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
x
a
e
r

l

.

e
s
i
c
r
e
x
e

d
n
a

,

e
r
a
c
-
f
l
e
s

e
r
e
w
s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

i

y
b

.

h
g
h

i

s
a
w
n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

l
l

a
r
e
v
O

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

p
u
o
r
g

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

r
o

f

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

d
n
a

s
r
e
b
m
e
m
p
u
o
r
g

t
n

i
l

a
B

f

o

s
t
s
e
t

o
n

t
u
b

,

s
r
e
b
m
e
m

d
e
t
c
u
d
n
o
c

e
c
n
a
c
i
f
i

n
g
i
s

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

t
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
c

o
N

i

y
t
e
x
n
a

n
o

s
p
u
o
r
g

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

i

g
n
p
o
c

r
o

t
n
e
m
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

g
i
s

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

p
u
o
r
g

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

e
h
T

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

I

B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

4
6

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

.

6
0
1
=
d

E
E

%
5
9

,

9
5

.

=
d

P
D

,

9
4
1

.

n
o

f

o

o
t

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)
s
k
e
e
w
8

t
A

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
h
t

o
t

e
v
i
t
a
e
r

l

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

s
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n

i

g
i
s

o
N

d
n
a

e
p
y
t

y
t
i
l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p

s
t
c
e
f
f
e

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

i

y
t
e
x
n
a

n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

,
)
9
7
1

.

o
t

o
t

1
5

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

.

2
3
1
=
d
(

s
s
e
r
t
s

n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

,
)
8
9
1

.

2
2

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

.

1
0
1
=
d
(

e
c
n
e

i
l
i
s
e
r

n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

g
S

i

o
t

8
3

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

.

6
1
1
=
d
(

)
0
7

.

o
t

.

1
1
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

0
3

.

A
P

d
n
a

,

0
0
1

.

o
t

8
1

.

=

I

C

=
d

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(

(cid:129)

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)
s
k
e
e
w
2
1

t
A

)
2
0
1

.

.
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

p
u
o
r
g

e
u
g
i
t
a
f

r
o

f

e
g
n
a
h
c

g
i
s

o
N

o
t

.

8
4
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

3
2

.

=
d
(

y
t
i
l

a
u
q

n

i

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

6
0

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

3
8

.

=
d
(

d
n
a

e
f
i
l

,
)
5
1
2

.

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

r
o

f

)
1
6
1

.

f

o

o
t

)

p
u
o
r
g
t
n

i
l

a
B
(

s
t
n
e
i
t
a
p
h
t
i

w

r
o

)

p
u
o
r
g
t
u
o
n
r
u
b

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

s
n
o
i
t
c
a
r
e
t
n

i

n
o
g
n
i
s
u
c
o

f

i

g
n
d
n
a
t
s
r
e
d
n
u
n
o
g
n
i
s
u
c
o

f

a

e
c
n
o

(

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

r
u
o
F

)

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

h
-
1

f

o

,

k
e
e
w

s
l
l
i
k
s

i

g
n
p
o
C

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
S

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

h
t
i

w

e
g
a
n
a
m
o
t

s
l
l
i
k
s
g
n
p
o
c

i

l

i

g
n
p
o
e
v
e
d
d
n
a

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

s
s
e
r
t
s

k
e
e
w
-
x
S

i

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

e
v
i
t
i
n
g
o
c

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

,

l

i

s
e
p
c
n
i
r
p

l

i

a
r
u
o
v
a
h
e
b

y
l
k
e
e
w
d
e
h

l

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

h
t
i

w

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

h
-
2

r
o

f

l

i

a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

i

n
m
-
0
9

,

l

e
g
n
S

i

T
R
A
M
S

n

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

y
t
i
l

a
n
o
s
r
e
P

i

s
e
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

i

g
n
p
o
C

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

I

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

i

y
t
e
x
n
A

e
u
g
i
t
a
F

d
e
c
a
p

a

n

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
a
t
i
d
e
m
g
n
h
t
a
e
r
b

i

,

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

s
s
e
r
t
s

d
n
a

y
c
n
e

i
l
i
s
e
r

e
f
i
l

f

o

y
t
i
l

a
u
Q

(cid:129)

(

(cid:129)

l

i

a
u
d
v
d
n

i

i

i

n
m
-
0
9

,

l

e
g
n
S

i

s
s
e
r
t
s

d
n
a

y
c
n
e

i
l
i
s
e
r

T
R
A
M
S

n

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

s
s
e
n
e
r
a
w
a

i

y
t
e
x
n
A

l

u
f
d
n
M

i

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

)
I

A
T
S
(

i

y
t
e
x
n
A

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

A
S
U
/
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w

,
l

a
i
r
t

e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

y

l
i

m
a
f

6
=
N

l

a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e

-
i
s
a
u
Q

]
3
3
[

e
o
n
e
p
o
P

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

(cid:129)

l

a
t
i
p
s
o
h

0
5
=
N

r
o

y
b

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

)
3
=
n
(

)
3
=
n
(

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

p
u
o
r
g

t
n

i
l

a
B

k
r
o
w
g
n
i
t
s
i
x
e
-
e
r
p

s
p
u
o
r
g

l

a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e
-
i
s
a
u
Q

]
8
3
[

l

d
e
i
f
e
n
h
S

i

)
S
S
P
(

s
s
e
r
t
S

e
c
n
e

i
l
i
s
e
R

)

I

C
S
R
-
D
C

(

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

)
S
S
P
(

s
s
e
r
t
S

e
c
n
e

i
l
i
s
e
R

)

I

C
S
R
-
D
C

(

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

i

/
s
n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

d
e
s
a
b

m
o
d
n
a
r
-
n
o
n

h
t
i

w

,
l

a
i
r
t

A
S
U

)
5
2
=
n
(

o
t

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

f

o

n
o
i
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

t
s
i
l
t
i
a
w

r
o

)
5
2
=
n
(

i

/
s
n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

i

i

e
n
c
d
e
m

l

a
n
r
e
t
n

i

)

d
e

l
l

o
r
n
e

0
4

f

o

(

2
3
=
N

)
0
2
=
n
(

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

]
8
4
[

.
l

a

t
e

d
o
o
S

A
S
U

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

t
s
i
l
t
i
a
w

r
o

)
0
2
=
n
(

A
S
U
/
s
n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

i

)
3
1
=
n
(

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

l

y
g
o
o
d
a
r

i

6
2
=
N

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

]
7
2
[

.
l

a

t
e

d
o
o
S

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

t
s
i
l
t
i
a
w

r
o

)
3
1
=
n
(

s
s
e
n
e
r
a
w
a

n
o
i
t
n
e
t
t
a

o
t

6
3

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

.

4
2
1
=
d
(

l

u
f
d
n
m

i

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

p
u
o
r
g

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

r
o

f

)
8
6
1

.

o
t

e
f
i
l

f

o

y
t
i
l

a
u
q

d
n
a

,
)
3
1
2

.

.

1
0
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

3
8

.

=
d
(

i

n
m
-
0
3

l

a
n
o
i
t
p
o

d
n
a

s
l
l

a
c

n
o
i
s
s
e
s

r
e
t
s
o
o
b

n

i

s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

d
n
a

,
)
1
7
1

.

o
t

e
n
o
h
p

p
u
-
w
o

l
l

o

f

o
w

t

h
t
i

w

2
0

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

6
8

.

=
d
(

,
)
3
8
1

.

o
t

2
1

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

8
9

.

s
s
e
r
t
s

n

i

s
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d

=
d
(

g
S

i

i

y
t
e
x
n
a

,

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

e
f
i
l

f

o

y
t
i
l

a
u
Q

.

2
0
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

)
5
2
1

.

o
t

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

g
S

i

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

(cid:129)

l
l

a

n

i

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

(

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

l

i

a
c
d
e
m
g
n
o
m
a

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

r
o

s
s
e
r
t
s

g
n
i
t
e
g
r
a
t

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i

f

o

y
r
a
m
m
u
S

1

e
l
b
a
T

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 10 of 19

e
c
n
a
d
n
e
t
t
a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

I

f

o

.

7
1
1

f

o

e
g
a
r
e
v
a
(

w
o

l

)

d
e
d
n
e
t
t
a

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

9
1

(cid:129)

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)
s
h
t
n
o
m
3

t
A

d
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

g
S

i

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
g
n
e

(

(cid:129)

h
g
h

i

d
e
c
u
d
e
r

m
e
t
i

)
I
B
M
n
o

(

P
D

r
o

f

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

p
u
o
r
g

d
n
a

)
0
5

.

o
t

4
4
.
-

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

2
0

.

=

d
(

s
s
e
r
t
s

r
o

)
0
5

.

o
t

4
4
.
-

=

I

C
%
5
9

%
5
9

,

5
3

.

=
d
(

)
6
1
1

.

o
t

e
c
n
e

i
l
i
s
e
r

.

7
4
−
=

I

C

r
o

f

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

g
i
s

o
N

,

3
0

.

=

d
(

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

l

a
t
o
t

n
o

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

g
i
s

o
N

r
o

f

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
P

l

a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

r
e
w
o
p

p
u
o
r
g

n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
c

o
N

t
o
n

s
S
E

f

o

s
I
C

d
n
a

s
S
E

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

t
u
b

,

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

n
a
e
m
e
h
t

o
t

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
r

a
t
a
d

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
m
o
r
f

f

o

e
c
n
e
d
v
e

i

e
m
o
S

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

d
e
s
i

m
o
d
n
a
r

T
C
R

.

o
r
e
z

t
u
b

s
n
o
i
t
p
e
c
r
e
p

d
e
t
a
c
d
n

i

i

d
n
a

s
l
l
i
k
s

d
e
v
o
r
p
m

i

f

o

t
l
u
s
e
r

a

s
a

e
c
n
e
d

i
f

n
o
c

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
h
t

f

o

k
c
a
b
d
e
e
f

e
v
i
t
a
t
i
l

a
u
Q

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

,

h
t
n
o
m
-
2
1

p
u
-
w
o

l
l

o

f

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

0
7

.

,

9
1
1

.

o
t

3
2

.

s
t
c
e
f
f
e

h
t
i

w

t
a

i

d
e
n
a
t
n
a
m

i

o
t

d
e
r
a
p
m
o
c

=

d

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

.

0
7
1
=
d
(

f

o

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
e
o
c

r
e
w
o

l

g
S

i

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
i
r
a
v

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h

r
e
h
g
h

i

,
)
4
8
2

.

o
t

5
5

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

r
e
t
a
e
r
g

&

)
2
7
1

.

o
t

%
5
9

,

1
7

.

=
d
(

y
r
e
g
r
u
s

.

0
3
−
=

n

i

I

C

k
r
o
w
m
a
e
t

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o

)
6
1
1

.

o
t

0
8

.

=

I

C
%
5
9

,

8
1

.

I

A
T
S

n
o

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

g
i
s

=
d
(

o
N

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

n

i

s
l
l
i
k
s

i

g
n
p
o
c

%
5
9

,

.

6
3
−
=
d
(

)
3
6

.

o
t

l

o
s
i
t
r
o
c

.

5
3
1
−
=

r
o

I

C

h
t
i

w
n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

h
g
H

i

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

t
s
o
p

s
k
e
e
w
4

t
A

t
s
o
m

s
a

d
e
t
a
r

s
n
o
i
s
s
u
c
s
i
d

p
u
o
r
g

h
t
i

w

,

e
m
m
a
r
g
o
r
p

y
t
i
v
i
t
c
a

l

u
f
p
e
h

l

.

4
2
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

7
3

.

=
d
(

l

e
a
c
s
b
u
s

E
E

n

i

s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r

g
S

i

l

l

i

a
c
g
o
o
h
c
y
s
p

d
n
a

%
5
9

,

.

3
1
1
=
d
(

s
s
e
r
t
s
i
d

I

B
M

)
8
9

.

f

o

o
t

)
0
8
1

.

o
t

9
4

.

=

I

C

)
9
7

.

o
t

.

6
3
−
=

.

3
4
−
=

I

C
%
5
9

,

9
1

.

I

C
%
5
9

,

5
2

.

=
d
(

A
P

P
D

r
o

f

s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

d

g
i
s

=
d
(

o
N

,
I

B
M

f

o

l

s
e
a
c
s
b
u
s

)
6
8

.

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

b
o

j

r
o

o
t

r
o

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

,
t
r
o
p
p
u
s

l

i

a
c
o
s

,

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m
e
c
i
t
c
a
r
p

d
n
a

,

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
c
e
p
x
e

-
f
l
e
s

i

g
n
g
a
n
a
m

n
o
i
t
a
x
a
e
r

l

n
o

g
n
i
s
u
c
o

f

,

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

h
-
3

f

o

h
c
a
e

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

b
o
J

h
t
i

w

)
2
1
-
Q
H
G

(

s
s
e
r
t
s
i
d

s
n
o
i
s
s
u
c
s
i
d

p
u
o
r
g

d
e
d
u
G

i

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

b
o
J

l

d
e
h

,

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

h
-
1
(

e
f
i
l

f

o

y
t
i
l

a
u
Q

,

s
h
t
n
o
m
9

r
e
v
o

y
l
t
h
g
n
t
r
o

i

f

)
l
a
t
o
t

n

i

s
n
o
i
s
s
e
s

9
1

,

l

s
s
e
n
u
f
d
n
m
n
o

i

g
n
i
s
s
u
c
o

f

d
e
r
a
h
s

d
n
a

,

n
o
i
t
c
e
l
f
e
r

s
e
c
n
e
i
r
e
p
x
e

t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m

s
s
e
r
t
S

d
n
a

,

i

g
n
p
o
c

,

n
o
i
t
a
x
a
e
r

l

l

a
s
r
a
e
h
e
r

l

a
t
n
e
m

i

g
n
d
u
c
n

l

i

i

g
n
n
a
r
t

i

h
t
l
a
e
h

l

a
t
n
e
m

d
n
a

l

a
c
i
s
y
h
P

n
o
i
s
s
e
r
p
e
D

e
u
g
i
t
a
F

i

n
a
c
i
s
y
h
P

y
h
t
a
p
m
e

i

g
n
p
o
c

l

i

a
c
g
r
u
s

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

i

s
e
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

d
e

i
l

p
p
A

i

d
e
d
v
o
r
p

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
a
r
u
d

,

i

s
e
g
e
t
a
r
t
s

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

f

o

,

y
l
t
h
g
n
t
r
o

i

f

l

d
e
h

,

i

s
r
a
n
m
e
s

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
S

l

a
n
o
i
t
a
c
u
d
e

e
e
r
h
T

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

b
o
J

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

,

e
t
a
r

t
r
a
e
h

(

s
s
e
r
t
S

,
l

o
s
i
t
r
o
c

y
r
a
v

i
l

a
s

r
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

d
n
a

)
I

A
T
S
(

i

y
t
e
x
n
A

)

g
n
i
t
a
r

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

l

l

i

a
c
g
o
o
h
c
y
s
P

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

l

i

a
c
g
r
u
s

6
1
=
N

K
U
/
s
t
n
e
d
i
s
e
r

l

e
a
m
e
f

0
2
=
N

/
s
r
e
n
o
i
t
i
t
c
a
r
p

a

i
l

a
r
t
s
u
A

l

a
r
e
n
e
g

A
S
U

i

/
s
n
a
c
i
s
y
h
p

i

i

e
n
c
d
e
m

)
7
3
=
n
(

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
t
c
a

r
o

)
7
3
=
n
(

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

.
l

a

t
e

l

e
z
t
e
W

)
8
=
n
(

r
o

)
8
=
n
(

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

t
s
i
l
t
i
a
w

o
t

d
e
t
a
c
o

l
l

a

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

]
1
4
[

,

n
g
i
s
e
d

p
u
o
r
g

l

e
g
n
S

i

.
l

a

t
e

l

d
e
i
f
e
n
W

i

n
e
k
a
t

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

-
t
s
o
p

d
n
a

-
e
r
p

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

]
4
3
[

)
I
B
M

(

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

)
S
S
P
(

s
s
e
r
t
S

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

l

a
n
r
e
t
n

i

4
7
=
N

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

h
t
i

w
T
C
R

]
9
4
[

.
l

a

t
e

t
s
e
W

A
P

P
D

t
n
e
m
h
s
i
l

p
m
o
c
c
a

l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p

,
I

B
M

f
o

l

e
a
c
s
b
u
s

n
o
i
t
a
s
i
l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p
e
d

,
I

B
M

f
o

l

e
a
c
s
b
u
s

n
o
i
t
s
u
a
h
x
e

l

a
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

,

y
r
o
t
n
e
v
n

I

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

h
c
a
l
s
a
M

,

y
r
o
t
n
e
v
n

I

y
t
e
i
x
n
A

t
i
a
r
T
-
e
t
a
t
S

o
t

n
o
i
t
n
e
t
n

i

T
T

I

,
l
l
i

k
S

l

a
c
i
n
h
c
e
T

f
o

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
A
d
e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
S

j

e
v
i
t
c
e
b
O
S
T
A
S
O

,

e
r
i
a
n
n
o
i
t
s
e
u
Q
h
t
l
a
e
H

l

a
r
e
n
e
G
2
1
-
Q
H
G

,

l

e
a
c
S

e
c
n
e

i
l
i
s
e
R

n
o
s
d
v
a
D

i

-
r
o
n
n
o
C

C
S
I
R
-
D
C

S
S
P

,

l

e
a
c
S

s
s
e
r
t
S

i

d
e
v
e
c
r
e
P

,
t
n
e
m
u
r
t
s
n

I

s

m
e
t
s
y
S

s
s
e
r
t
S

I

A
T
S

,
l

a
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
c
n
e
d
i
f
n
o
c

,

e
z
i
s

t
c
e
f
f
e

I

C

I

B
M

E
E

i

g
n
h
t
y
n
a

e
b

o
t

d
e
r
r
e
f
n

i

l

y
b
a

i
l

e
r

e
b

t
o
n
n
a
c

e
z
i
s

t
c
e
f
f
e

l

n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p

e
h
t

,

s
t
c
e
f
f
e

t
n
a
c
i
f
i
n
g
i
s
-
n
o
n

r
o
f

t
a
h
t

d
e
t
o
n

e
b

l

d
u
o
h
s

t
i

,
r
e
v
e
w
o
h

;

m
e
h
t

l

e
t
a
u
c
l
a
c

o
t

l

e
b
i
s
s
o
p

s
a
w

t
i

r
e
v
e
r
e
h
w
d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

e
r
a

s
e
z
i
s

t
c
e
f
f
e

l

e
p
m
a
S

l

s
e
b
a
i
r
a
v

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d

s
V
D

,
t
a
e
r
t

I
S
S
E

S
E

,
I

B
M

f
o

l

e
a
c
s
b
u
s

,
l

a
i
r
t

d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

(

s
r
o
t
c
o
d

l

i

a
c
d
e
m
g
n
o
m
a

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

r
o

s
s
e
r
t
s

g
n
i
t
e
g
r
a
t

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i

f

o

y
r
a
m
m
u
S

1

e
l
b
a
T

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 11 of 19

the control groups may have already been under greater
work strain (e.g. [38]) and were then not given the
equivalent time released from work as those participants
thus only creating the
undertaking the intervention,
illusion of specific intervention effects. Furthermore,
self-selection also creates the possibility that participants
may have selected conditions based on other variables,
such as personality traits, which may then also have
influenced engagement with, and the results of, inter-
ventions. Of the four studies that contained active com-
parison conditions, two [40, 49] utilised active control
conditions, i.e. participants in the control condition were
released from regular duties for the same period of time
or undertook an unrelated task for the period, and two
studies compared two comparable active treatment
interventions [33, 36].

individuals delivering the

Delivery format, duration, and engagement
All interventions were delivered in person, although de-
tail was often lacking regarding the skills and training of
interventions. Total
the
duration of interventions varied from 45 min [43] to ap-
proximately 60 h [36], with one study failing to specify
the duration of the intervention [41]. Most studies (12
out of 13) were brief interventions of less than 10-h dur-
ation [26, 27, 32–35, 37, 40, 42–44, 48]. The two studies
conducted by Isaksson and colleagues [25, 50] combined
participants who completed a 1-day (6–7 h) counselling
and participants who completed a 5-day counselling
intervention, although specific intervention effects for
the different programmes were not explored. No clear
dose-response patterns were identified among interven-
tions, with strong treatment effects reported for the brief
intervention examined by Sood et al. [27, 48], but in-
creases in burnout found for the 60-h intervention ex-
amined by Margalit et al. [36]. There was a lack of detail
in describing and utilising strategies to promote engage-
ment with interventions, which may have contributed to
the low levels of participant adherence observed in a num-
ber of the studies (e.g. [19, 45, 49]). Detail was also lacking
in measuring and reporting engagement and adherence
with intervention procedures. From the 23 studies, only
43% (n = 10) reported data relating to participant adher-
ence or participation in intervention procedures and 74%
(n = 17) reported data relating to participant dropout dur-
ing the intervention.

Research quality
Studies were appraised for quality in accordance with
the CASP and SORT guidelines (see Table 2). Results of
these analyses indicated that there is a need for im-
proved quality among studies conducted in this area. In
particular, many studies lacked detail
in reporting of
statistical analyses and/or failed to adequately check for

and control baseline differences between groups. There
was insufficient use of random allocation of participants
and active control conditions. Insufficient reporting on
participant flow made it difficult to determine the level
of dropout in studies, and there were only limited at-
tempts to account/adjust for the effect of this dropout
on main analyses, such as by means of intention to treat.
From the data extracted using the CASP, only nine stud-
ies (39% [19, 25, 27, 38, 39, 41, 45, 48, 50]) provided
enough evidence to determine that the benefits of the
intervention outweighed the costs or harms. Many stud-
ies did not provide adequate detail on effect sizes or
main analyses for this decision to be made. The data ex-
tracted from the CASP and study summaries were used
to rate the quality of each study according to the SORT.
All 23 studies were rated as Level 2 Evidence in terms of
quality, with no studies meeting criteria to be classified
as high quality, Level 1 Evidence. Due to the inclusion
criteria utilised pertaining to study design (measure-
ments at least two time points), no studies were classi-
fied as Level of Evidence 3. The overall “Strength of
Recommendation” for the body of evidence was classi-
fied as B, as consistent findings from at least two high
quality (Level of Evidence 1) studies were not found.

Interventions and effects
The 23 studies reported on 21 unique intervention
programmes, with one nationally available counselling
intervention reported in two studies [25, 50] and one
resiliency and stress management programme also re-
ported in two studies [27, 48]. The efficacy of interven-
tions was examined with regard to theoretical basis or
approach of the intervention. To achieve this, studies
were grouped thematically in accordance with the pri-
mary features or targeted processes of change of the
intervention. Through this process, three broad categor-
ies of interventions were identified; interventions that fo-
cused on educating or achieving cognitive or behavioural
change, interventions that focused purely on relaxation
or attention training strategies, and interventions that
were primarily designed as unstructured support or
discussion-focused.

Effect sizes and pooling
For studies that did not report effect sizes (n = 20, ap-
proximately 87%), these were estimated from descriptive
or test statistics when such information was available
[29]. Effect sizes were able to be calculated for 12 stud-
ies, but should be interpreted cautiously as they could
not be adjusted for the correlation between pre-post as-
sessments, as it was often not reported in the original
study. Furthermore, three of these studies enabled calcu-
lation of effect sizes for a single subscale of burnout, but
not for the remaining subscales or total scale. As total

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 12 of 19

T
R
O
S

e
c
n
e
d
v
E

i

f

o

l

e
v
e
L

h
t
r
o
w
s
t
i
f
e
n
e
b

e
h
t

e
r
A

.

1
1

c
?
s
t
s
o
c

e
h
t

d
n
a

s

m
r
a
h

e
h
t

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

s
e
Y

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

/
n
o
i
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
P

i

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
d
a

t
n
a
t
r
o
p
m

i

s
e
m
o
c
t
u
o

y

l
l

a
c
n

i

i
l

c

?
d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

i

m
u
d
e
M

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

d
e
d
u
c
x
e

l

e
r
e
w
1
1
(

l

g
n
i
t
e
p
m
o
c

t
o
n

r
o

f

t
u
b

,

s
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a

l
l

a

)

n
e
v
g

i

e
r
e
w
s
l
i

a
t
e
d

o
n

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
p

(

)

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

o
N

s
e
Y

A
/
N

o
N

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

,

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

,

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

/
n
o
i
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

i

d
n
a

n

i

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

f

o

t
o
n

e
c
n
a
d
n
e
t
t
a

l

d
e
t
e
p
m
o
c

s
p
u
o
r
g

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

)
s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

f
l
a
h

n
a
h
t

s
s
e
l
(

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

o
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

/
n
o
i
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

i

r
o
t
c
o
D

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

o
N

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

o
N

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

o
N

t
o
n

e
c
n
a
d
n
e
t
t
a

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

s
e
Y

o
N

t
a
h
t

t
s
i
l
k
c
e
h
c
m
o
t
p
m
y
s

I

B
M
3

f

o

2

d
e
d
u
c
x
e
(

l

e
h
t

s
a

l
l

e
w
s
a

l

s
e
a
c
s

2
1

t
a

d
e
r
e
t
s
i
n
m
d
a

i

p
u
w
o

l
l

o

f

h
t
n
o
m

y
l
s
u
o
v
e
r
p

i

s
a
w

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

i

m
u
d
e
M

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

i

m
u
d
e
M

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

)

p
u
w
o

l
l

o

f

t
a
(

i

m
u
d
e
M

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

l
l

a
m
S

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

l
l

a
m
S

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
p

(

)

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

o
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

s
e
Y

o
N

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

)

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
p

(

l

r
a
e
c
n
U

d
n
a

s
r
o
t
a
u
a
v
E

l

t
o
n

i

s
t
n
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

s
r
e
h
c
r
a
e
s
e
r

,

d
e
d
n

i
l

b

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

t
c
e
f
f
e

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

e
v
i
t
a
g
e
n

l
l

a
m
S

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

o
N

s
e
Y

A
/
N

o
N

A
/
N

o
N

o
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

o
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

o
N

l

)
e
p
m
a
s

l

e
g
n
i
s
(

A
/
N

s
e
Y

l

)
e
p
m
a
s

l

e
g
n
i
s
(

A
/
N

l

)
e
p
m
a
s

l

e
g
n
i
s
(

A
/
N

l

)
e
p
m
a
s

l

e
g
n
i
s
(

A
/
N

l

)
e
p
m
a
s

l

e
g
n
i
s
(

A
/
N

l

)
e
p
m
a
s

l

e
g
n
i
s
(

A
/
N

s
e
Y

o
N

s
e
Y

]
6
4
[

.
l

a

t
e

l

a
e
S
-
r
a
B

s
e
Y

t
e

d
r
a
g
a
r
B

]
5
4
[

.
l

a

]
0
4
[

s
e
Y

.
l

a

t
e

i
t
t
e
h
G

]
7
4
[

s
e
Y

m
a
g
n
i
s
a
n
u
G

]
6
2
[

.
l

a

t
e

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

]
5
2
[

.
l

a

t
e

n
o
s
s
k
a
s
I

]
0
5
[

.
l

a

t
e

n
o
s
s
k
a
s
I

s
e
Y

.
l

a

t
e

b
t
o
K

]
2
3
[

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

]
9
1
[

.
l

a

t
e

r
e
n
s
a
r
K

]
7
3
[

.
l

a

t
e

e
r
i
a
m
e
L

]
2
4
[

.
l

a

t
e

r
e
h
a
M

]
6
3
[

.
l

a

t
e

t
i
l

a
g
r
a
M

l
l

a

e
r
e
W

.

0
1

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

e
h
t

n
a
C

.

9

e
s
i
c
e
r
p
w
o
H

.

8

e
g
r
a

l

w
o
H

.

7

f

o

l
l

a

e
r
e
W

.

6

m
o
r
f

e
d
i
s
A

.

5

s
p
u
o
r
g

e
h
t

e
r
e
W

.

4

,

s
t
n
e
i
t
a
p

e
r
e
W

.

3

e
h
t

s
a
W

.

2

y
d
u
t
s

e
h
t

i

d
D

.

1

y
d
u
t
S

T
R
O
S

e
h
t

d
n
a

t
s
i
l
k
c
e
h
c

l

a
i
r
t

d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

d
e
s
i

m
o
d
n
a
r

P
S
A
C

e
h
t

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

y
t
i
l

a
u
q

y
d
u
t
s

f

o

y
r
a
m
m
u
S

2

e
l
b
a
T

P
S
A
C

?
s
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
p

l

r
e
h
t
o

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

e
h
t

f

o

b
?
t
c
e
f
f
e

o
t

d
e

i
l

p
p
a

e
b

e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

e
h
t

s
a
w

t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

a
?
t
c
e
f
f
e

e
h
t

s
a
w

?
n
o
i
s
u
c
n
o
c

l

s
t
i

t
a

y
l
r
e
p
o
r
p

l

a
i
r
t

e
h
t

s
p
u
o
r
g

e
h
t

e
r
e
w

r
o

f

d
e
t
n
u
o
c
c
a

?
y

l
l

a
u
q
e

d
e
t
a
e
r
t

d
e
r
e
t
n
e

o
h
w

,

n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

?
l
a
i
r
t

e
h
t

f

o

y
d
u
t
s

d
n
a

l

e
n
n
o
s
r
e
p

?
d
e
d
n

i
l

b

?
d
e
s
i

m
o
d
n
a
r

o
t

s
t
n
e
i
t
a
p

s
t
n
e
m
t
a
e
r
t

?
e
u
s
s
i

d
e
s
u
c
o

f

s
t
n
e
i
t
a
p

e
h
t

l

a
t
n
e
m

i
r
e
p
x
e

e
h
t

t
r
a
t
s

e
h
t

t
a

r
a

l
i

m

i
s

,

s
r
e
k
r
o
w
h
t
l
a
e
h

f

o

t
n
e
m
n
g
i
s
s
a

y
l
r
a
e
c

l

a

s
s
e
r
d
d
a

s
e
Y

l

y
n
o

s
t
n
e
i
t
a
P

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

.
l

a

t
e

a
r
o
r
A

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 13 of 19

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

i

”
n
a
t
r
e
c
n
u
“

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

)
e
z
i
s

l

e
p
m
a
s

l
l

a
m

s
(

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

l

e
a
c
s

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

l

a
t
o
T

o
N

.

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
a
g
i
t
s
e
v
n

i

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

,

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
a

f

o

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

p
u
o
r
g

l

o
r
t
n
o
c
(

e
b

t
o
n

l

d
u
o
c

m
o
r
f

d
e
s
a
e
e
r

l

o
N

)
k
r
o
w

o
N

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
p

(

)

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

d
n
a

e
u
C
c
M

]
4
4
[

s
h
c
a
S

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

o
N

s
e
Y

t
e

i

n
e
t
s
l
i

M

]
3
4
[

.
l

a

s
e
Y

r
e
r
e
m
m
a
K

i

-
a
n
p
s
O

l

y
e
g
F

i

d
n
a

]
5
3
[

r
o

,

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

.

n
o
i
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

i

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

o
N

o
N

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

)

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

t
u
o
n
r
u
b

f

o

t
c
e
p
s
a

E
E

e
h
t

l

y
n
o

(

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

s
e
Y

o
N

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

d
n
a

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

t
o
n

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

e
g
r
a
L

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

e
g
r
a
L

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

s
t
l
u
s
e
r

i

t
n
e
c
i
f
f
u
s
n

I

o
t

d
e
t
n
e
s
e
r
p

i

e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

e
g
r
a
L

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

l
l

a
m
S

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

i

m
u
d
e
M

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
p

(

)

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
p

(

)

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

o
N

l

o
r
t
n
o
c

e
v
i
s
s
a
p

(

)

n
o
i
t
i
d
n
o
c

s
e
Y

o
N

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

s
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

e
r
p

o
n

(

i

n
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

)

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

o
N

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

o
N

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

s
e
Y

e
o
n
e
p
o
P

]
3
3
[

s
e
Y

l

d
e
i
f
e
n
h
S

i

s
e
Y

.
l

a

t
e

d
o
o
S

]
8
4
[

]
8
3
[

s
e
Y

.
l

a

t
e

d
o
o
S

]
7
2
[

s
e
Y

.
l

a

t
e

t
s
e
W

]
9
4
[

s
e
Y

.
l

a

t
e

l

e
z
t
e
W

]
1
4
[

A
/
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

l

)
e
p
m
a
s

l

e
g
n
i
s
(

A
/
N

s
e
Y

t
e

l

d
e
i
f
e
n
W

i

]
4
3
[

.
l

a

s
e
Y

/
n
o
i
t
a
p
c
i
t
r
a
p

i

d
n
a

t
o
n

e
c
n
e
r
e
h
d
a

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c

,

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
p
e
c
c
A

,

n
o
i
t
c
a
f
s
i
t
a
s

s
e
Y

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
N

,

s
s
e
r
t
s

r
o

f

e
g
r
a
L

A
P

r
o

f

i

m
u
d
e
m

l

e
a
c
s
b
u
s

o
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

A
/
N

l

)
e
p
m
a
s

l

e
g
n
i
s
(

A
/
N

s
e
Y

n
e
s
i
e
g
u

l
f
P

]
9
3
[

.
l

a

t
e

s
a

d
e
r
e
t
n
e

s
a
w
m
e
t
i

e
h
t

h
c
u
s

s
a

d
n
a

,
r
a
e
l
c
n
u

d
e
m
e
e
d

e
r
e
w
n
o
i
t
n
e
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
h
t

f
o

s
t
i
f
e
n
e
b

e
h
t

f
o

i

t
h
g
e
w
e
h
t

,

i

d
e
d
v
o
r
p

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n

i

e
h
t

m
o
r
f

l

d
e
t
a
u
c
l
a
c

e
b

o
t

l

e
b
a

t
o
n

d
n
a

d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

t
o
n

s
a
w
e
z
i
s

t
c
e
f
f
e

n
a

h
c
i
h
w
n

i

i

s
e
d
u
t
s

t
n
e
m
h
s
i
l

p
m
o
c
c
a

l

a
n
o
s
r
e
p

A
P

,

n
o
i
t
s
u
a
h
x
e

l

a
n
o
i
t
o
m
e

E
E

,

y
r
o
t
n
e
v
n

I

t
u
o
n
r
u
B

h
c
a
l
s
a
M

I

B
M

s
e
r
u
s
a
e
m

)
t
u
o
n
r
u
b

r
o

s
s
e
r
t
s
(

e
m
o
c
t
u
o

y
r
a
m

i
r
p

r
o
f

s
e
z
i
s

t
c
e
f
f
e

n
o

l

y
n
o

e
z
i
s

t
c
e
f
f
e

n
a

d
n
u
o
r
a

s
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i

e
c
n
e
d
i
f
n
o
c

n
o

d
e
s
a
B
a

d
e
s
a
B
b

r
o
F
c

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
C

(

T
R
O
S

e
h
t

d
n
a

t
s
i
l
k
c
e
h
c

l

a
i
r
t

d
e

l
l

o
r
t
n
o
c

d
e
s
i

m
o
d
n
a
r

P
S
A
C

e
h
t

n
o

d
e
s
a
b

y
t
i
l

a
u
q

y
d
u
t
s

f

o

y
r
a
m
m
u
S

2

e
l
b
a
T

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 14 of 19

effect sizes were available for less than half of the study
sample, a risk of bias analysis would not have been rep-
resentative of the sample and may have been misleading
and, therefore, is not reported.

Although pooling of effect sizes was intended as a
method to assist in the synthesis of data from the study
pool,
the primary data could not support such an
analysis and so a decision was made to proceed with a
narrative only systematic review. This decision was made
based on the following: the lack of available effect sizes
or primary data to estimate effect sizes (half of total
studies, none available from the category of discussion/
support groups, and only one effect size from the relax-
ation category); lack of quality among the study sample;
inclusion of randomised and non-randomised studies in
the review; and heterogeneity among the included stud-
ies. Furthermore, with no studies being classified as high
quality, meta-analysis was considered inappropriate as
pooling effect sizes across studies where some or all are
at elevated risk of internal bias may compound the er-
rors of the original studies and produce incorrect and
misleading results [52–54]. In addition, pooling effect sizes
from both randomised and non-randomised studies pre-
sents a number of methodological concerns, which limits
inferences and generalisability of meta-analytic claims
[55]. Finally, among the one intervention category (cogni-
tive behavioural interventions) that contained greater than
one effect size (to allow for pooling), considerable hetero-
geneity was observed among the studies. This heterogen-
eity related to study design (one or multiple samples,
random or non-random allocation,
intervention and
follow-up lengths), outcome measures (physiological or
self-report, stress or burnout), and participant populations
(junior doctor, specialist, or general samples). For these
reasons, pooling of effect sizes was considered premature
given the state of the current body of evidence.

Interventions based on cognitive or behavioural principles
Although there was considerable diversity in the inter-
ventions described within this group, 17 of 23 studies
described interventions that were primarily based on
principles of cognitive or behavioural change. These in-
terventions aimed to promote the development of cop-
ing, stress management, mindfulness, communication,
or cognitive reappraisal skills [19, 25, 27, 33, 34, 36, 38,
39, 41–45, 48–50, 51]. Of the 17 studies, six examined
both stress and burnout [25, 39, 44, 45, 49, 50], seven
examined only burnout [19, 33, 34, 36, 38, 43, 32],
and four examined only stress [27, 41, 42, 48].

Among the 10 studies reporting on measures of stress,
stress was measured by a variety of means,
including
self-report questionnaires, heart rate variability, and cor-
tisol
contained
information required to estimate) at least one pre- to

levels. Seven studies

reported (or

post-intervention effect size for stress, resulting in nine avail-
able effect sizes. Primarily positive, medium [45] to large [27,
39, 41, 48] reductions in stress were reported (effect sizes ran-
ging d = .02–1.70) from pre- to post-intervention periods.
Despite reporting a large reduction in coefficient of heart rate
variability (d = 1.70), Wetzel and colleagues [41] reported only
a small effect on a simultaneous cortisol measurement of
stress (d = .36). One study reported a non-significant,
but medium (d = .56)
increase in mean heart rate
variability for intervention participants compared to con-
trol participants [42]. An effect size was not able to be cal-
culated for McCue and Sachs [44], although a significant
reduction in stress was reported. Isaksson and colleagues
reported outcomes of a counselling intervention across
two papers, and although no post-treatment data was pre-
sented, a moderate reduction in job-related stress (d = .65)
was reported at 12-month follow-up [25] and maintained
at 3-year follow-up [50]. West et al. [49] reported no sig-
nificant treatment effects for stress (d = .02) between
intervention or active control conditions at post or either
3-month or 1-year follow up time points. Only one other
paper examined follow up intervention effects for stress,
with Pflugeisen et al. [39] reporting maintenance of treat-
ment gains at an eight week follow-up.
Of the 13 cognitive/behavioural

intervention studies
that contained a measure of burnout (all utilising self-
report assessments), seven contained (or allowed estima-
tion of) at least one pre- to post-intervention effect size,
with 12 effect sizes available across the articles. All except
one study operationalised burnout according to the three
subscales described by Maslach [16], with primarily small
to medium (d = .08 to 1.06) reductions in burnout re-
ported [32, 34, 38, 39, 49]. One study [32] reported gains
on one burnout subscale (from the Maslach inventory),
but no effect on other subscales from the same inventory
(d < .01 to .08), and one further study reported no inter-
vention effects (d = .02 to .14) on any burnout subscale
[45]. Of the six studies, two measured burnout as a total
scale, with [36] reporting a significant, but small (d = .46)
increase in burnout from pre- to post-intervention, and
[49] reporting non-significant total effects. Three studies
did not contain post-intervention data, but did report on
follow-up data. In the two articles by Isaksson and col-
leagues [25, 50], a medium reduction (d = .55) only on the
emotional exhaustion subscale of the Maslach Burnout In-
ventory (MBI) was observed at 12-month follow-up and
maintained at 3-year follow-up. Krasner et al. [19] also re-
ported small to medium (d = .44 to .62) reductions across
burnout subscales at their 3-month follow-up. Pflugeisen
et al. [39] and West et al. [49] were the only studies to re-
port both post and follow-up data, with Pflugeisen et al.
[39] reporting treatment gains on the personal accom-
plishment and emotional exhaustion subscales of the MBI
maintained at 8-week follow-up. West et al. [49] reported

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 15 of 19

no overall or subscale changes at post, but a significant
improvement in scores identified as high on the deperson-
alisation subscale at three-mont follow-up, which were
maintained through to one-year follow-up. Of the three
studies that did not report sufficient data to estimate effect
size, one reported no tests of significance [33] and the
remaining two [43, 44] reported non-significant changes
in burnout from pre- to post-intervention.

Relaxation and attention training interventions
While a number of interventions using cognitive or behav-
ioural strategies included relaxation or attention training as
a component, three studies described interventions that fo-
cused solely on the use of relaxation or attention training to
reduce occupational stress or burnout [35, 37, 40]. Arora et
al. [40] utilised a mental imagery intervention designed to
lower surgeons’ stress while performing a surgical proced-
ure; Ospina-Kammerer and Figley [35] utilised a relax-
ation intervention focused on breathing to reduce
burnout; and Lemaire et al. [37] utilised a biofeedback
intervention based on participants’ heart rhythm patterns
to reduce stress. Of the three studies, only Lemaire et al.
[37] reported effect sizes, with a small (d = .44) reduction
in self-reported stress observed at post-treatment and
maintained at 4-week follow-up. This effect was not how-
ever replicated on their physiological measures of stress
(d < .01 to .21). The remaining two studies did not allow
for effect size estimation. However, Ospina-Kammerer
and Figley [35] reported a significant reduction in the
emotional exhaustion subscale of the MBI (results for
other subscales not reported) relative to the control group
at post treatment, and Arora et al. [40] reported a reduc-
tion in average and maximum heart rate and salivary cor-
tisol during the intervention but not at post intervention.
Neither study reported follow-up effects.

Discussion and support interventions
Three studies focused on the efficacy of support or dis-
cussion interventions [26, 46, 47], while a fourth utilised
a discussion group as the comparator in examining the
efficacy of their cognitive behavioural intervention [33].
Bar-Sela et al. [46], Ghetti et al. [47], and Popenoe [33]
reported on the use of Balint groups, while Gunasingam
et al. [26] reported on the use of workplace debriefing
sessions. Effect sizes were not reported or able to be
estimated for any of the studies. None of the studies
reported significant intervention effects on measures of
burnout, with Popenoe [33] and Bar-Sela et al. [46]
reporting a trend for burnout scores to worsen over time
for participants in the Balint group. These results should
however be interpreted with caution, due to the small
sample sizes and lack of individual or group level ana-
lyses, such as clinical change or analyses of significance
or effect size.

Acceptability and satisfaction
Studies were reviewed for assessment of participant ac-
ceptability or satisfaction with interventions, regardless
of whether this was examined by quantitative or qualita-
tive methods. Acceptability or satisfaction with the inter-
vention was formally assessed in only 10 studies (44%).
Among these, acceptability and satisfaction was typically
assessed by means of original questionnaires or inter-
views, with data analysed descriptively, for example by
mean ratings of satisfaction or percentage of satisfied
participants. The use of original and unstandardised
questionnaires limits comparisons and data synthesis
across studies. However, for the studies that did report
on these factors, acceptability and satisfaction were typ-
ically high, although this should be considered in the
context of the use of unstandardised measures and that
many lacked an active comparison condition against
which to assess satisfaction. Isaksson [25] found that
among male doctors’ satisfaction with the intervention
independently predicted reduction in the emotional ex-
haustion scale of the MBI. However, this trend was not
significant for female doctors. Although most studies did
not formally assess satisfaction or acceptability,
issues
such as low opt in rates (e.g. [45, 47]) and low adherence
[19, 45]) should be
to intervention procedures (e.g.
considered in the context of assessing acceptability and
satisfaction. Overall, there is a need for greater use of
standardised measures to assess intervention satisfaction
(e.g. [56]) and greater rigour reporting and assessing
participant adherence.

Discussion
The principal aim of the current review was to evaluate
and summarise evidence for the efficacy of psychosocial/
behavioural interventions, targeting stress and burnout
among medical doctors. Secondary aims were to identify
whether the relative efficacy of these interventions varied
according to theoretical basis or type of intervention and
to also establish the overall quality of research in the
area. An examination of these issues is necessary to
determine whether occupational stress and burnout in
medical doctors can be mitigated via such interventions
and to provide a guide to the nature of the programme
effects.

representative

Of the 23 articles reviewed, approximately half the
studies (n = 11), pre- to post-intervention effect sizes
were not reported or insufficient data was reported to
allow effects to be estimated, which limited capacity for
a
bias.
Compounding this issue, a lack of quality among the
reviewed studies,
inclusion of randomised and non-
randomised studies, and considerable heterogeneity
among studies precluded the pooling of effect sizes as to
this type would have been
do so with research of

publication

assessment

of

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 16 of 19

inappropriate and potentially misleading [52–55]. This
decision also prevented the statistical comparison of in-
terventions across theoretical orientations (particularly
with no discussion/support interventions reporting effect
sizes and only one relaxation focused intervention
reporting an effect size) or determining overall effects of
psychosocial interventions for stress or burnout among
medical doctors.

Within the CBT approaches, the strongest effects were
reported for stress as an outcome and generally only
moderate effects noted for burnout. Although interpret-
ation of the effect sizes should be made with caution
given the considerable proportion of studies that did not
provide enough data to determine the magnitude of the
effect, these results may suggest that the components of
the CBT interventions studied here may not have ad-
equately addressed burnout. Greater investigation of ac-
tive treatment components to target burnout specifically
is an important avenue for future research. The review
also indicates that the efficacy of relaxation interventions
may be promising, though this is based almost exclu-
sively on statistical significance results and should be
interpreted with caution due to the small number of
studies (n = 3) and treatment effect sizes available
(n = 1). No evidence, whether by effect size or statis-
tical significance, was found for the efficacy of sup-
port of discussion groups, although again this is
limited by the small sample size (n = 4). These con-
to change as
clusions are provisional and subject
further, high quality, evidence becomes available.

Given that burnout represents a specific type of occu-
pational stress and incorporates potentially more intense
and longer-term symptoms such as emotional exhaus-
tion, depersonalisation, and reduced feelings of personal
accomplishment, it is likely that more focused interven-
tion strategies are required. The fact that support-based
interventions failed to demonstrate benefit suggests that
new learning is required with respect to coping or man-
agement strategies. That is, interventions may need to
focus on facilitating the development of
individually
meaningful strategies for managing occupational stress
in the longer term, to assist medical doctors in coping
with work that is, by its nature, inherently challenging.

While this review highlights the potential of psycho-
social
interventions to reduce the negative impacts of
in medical doctors,
occupational stress and burnout
caution is required in the interpretation of the findings.
Although there has been increased attention and re-
search in this field since the review conducted by
McCray and colleagues [3], as indicated by the current
quality appraisal, studies generally remain of moderate
quality. McCray et al. [3] identified a need for improved
quality and rigour within the field. In the nearly 10 years
since this review, more than double the number of

studies have been reviewed in the present paper, yet
similar to the original review, no studies received the
SORT 1 quality rating. Therefore, while research in this
issues with quality persist despite
field has expanded,
calls for improvement. Quality appraisals in the present
review identified a pressing need for well-powered, rigor-
ous RCTs. Studies reviewed were often underpowered
and lacking appropriate comparison groups, relevant
statistical analysis, comprehensive assessment of treat-
ment effects (group and individual
long-term
follow-up, and acceptability/feasibility data. Across stud-
ies, there was a need for greater consistency in reporting
treatment outcomes (effect sizes of raw data that allows
for further pooling of data), particularly given that many
studies were lacking in statistical power. Thus, while
psychosocial
interventions may offer promise, recom-
mendations regarding their use cannot yet be made with
confidence.

level),

Doctors’ acceptability and satisfaction with the pro-
grammes were generally high, but were directly assessed
in only 10 of the 23 studies reviewed. Overall, there is a
need for greater use of standardised measures to assess
intervention satisfaction (e.g.
[56]) and high quality
qualitative and survey research to better understand the
perceived needs of this population as well as the relative
appeal of different intervention modalities. Combined
with standardised approaches for assessing efficacy, this
research would ensure that programmes meet the needs
and expectations of doctors and thus have a greater
chance of uptake. Greater rigour is also needed in
reporting rates of participant adherence and dropout.
While potential problems of adherence with psycho-
social interventions are not necessarily unique to pro-
grammes targeting medical doctors, the focus for these
interventions should be to reduce occupational stress
while not adding burden to an individual’s workload. It
is therefore vital to ensure such interventions are inte-
grated into the workplace or the doctor’s lifestyle in a
non-intrusive manner. Such strategies will be essential
for efficacious programmes to reach optimal potential in
terms of implementation and dissemination.

Strengths and limitations
This review was conducted according to PRISMA guide-
lines and utilised established measures of quality assess-
ment (CASP and SORT) in evaluating studies and the
body of evidence. Despite these strengths, results of the
review should also be considered within the context of a
number of limitations. In particular, publication bias was
not assessed (available data may not have been represen-
tative of the sample) and pooling of effect sizes was con-
sidered premature. Although these exclusions may be
considered limitations of the review, it is the authors’
opinion that a narrative systematic review is the most

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 17 of 19

appropriate approach for the current state of evidence in
this field. This is also a key finding of the review itself
and provides a clear indication of avenues for future re-
search. However, results should be interpreted cautiously
due to these exclusions. Furthermore, not discussed in
this review was the cost of each intervention, financial
or otherwise. This outcome was not included in the
review due to a lack of reported information in the
included studies. Cost-effectiveness is an important con-
sideration of any intervention, and within this field, it
may be of particular importance when viewed in the
context of the costs that arise from the consequences
(medical errors, staff absences, early retirement from the
profession) of a population experiencing high stress and/
or burnout. Lastly, considerable heterogeneity was found
in the measurement of acceptability and satisfaction
across studies. The present review has reported this data
by individual study; however,
in
future reviews to synthesise this data according to theme
or facet of acceptability or satisfaction,
for example,
satisfaction with rationale, timing, or effects.

it may be beneficial

Conclusion
Burnout is not only highly prevalent among the medical
profession [1, 2] but also associated with significant costs
to doctors, patients, and healthcare systems [2, 5–8].
This review has found that despite increased attention,
the quality of research examining the benefits of psycho-
social/behavioural interventions for occupational stress
and burnout in medical doctors remains less than opti-
mal. Despite this, interventions focused on cognitive and
behavioural principles currently have the greatest evi-
dence base and, to date, show promise as an efficacious
treatment approach, particularly in reducing stress
among doctors. There is also some support for the con-
clusions that this approach is moderately effective with
respect to burnout.

This review highlights a pressing need for more re-
search to be conducted, particularly high-quality RCTs,
which will enable recommendations to be made about
interven-
the relative efficacy of various psychosocial
tions, their ability to improve both stress and burnout,
as well as produce long-term benefits and observable oc-
cupational improvements (e.g. associated improvements
in medical errors, career satisfaction). Such research
should also take into consideration the cost-effectiveness
of available interventions, particularly with reference to
the costs of not intervening. The challenge for hospital
stakeholders, educators, and policy makers is to identify
programmes that are effective for improving multiple
outcomes, are acceptable, and can be easily integrated
into training or practice to facilitate engagement with
and uptake of the intervention.

Appendix 1
Database search strategies
Search strategy for PsycINFO

1. (intern OR interns OR internship OR resident OR
residents OR physician OR “medic* practi*” OR
doctor OR surgeon OR registrar).ab

2. (burnout OR stress OR resilien* OR fatigue).ab
3. Physicians/OR family physicians/OR general

practitioners/OR gynaecologists/OR internists/OR
neurologists/OR obstetricians/OR pathologists/OR
paediatricians/OR psychiatrists/OR surgeons/

4. Occupational stress/OR stress/
5. 2 OR 4
6. 1 OR 3
7. 5 and 6
8. Limit 7 to English language

Search strategy for Medline

1. (intern OR interns OR internship OR resident OR
residents OR physician OR “medic* practi*” OR
doctor OR surgeon OR registrar).ab

2. (burnout OR stress OR resilien* OR fatigue).ab
3. physicians/OR foreign medical graduates/ OR

general practitioners/ OR osteopathic physicians/
OR physicians, family/ OR physicians, primary care
OR physicians, women/ OR surgeons/ occupational
health physicians
4. burnout, professional/
5. 1 OR 3
6. 2 OR 4
7. 7 AND 6
8. limit 7 to English language

selected for

Search strategy for Informit
Databases
inclusion were: Australasian
Medical Index (AMI), Australian Public Affairs Informa-
tion Service - Health (APAIS-Health), Health & Society,
Health Collection, Rural and Remote Health Database
(RURAL).

1. (intern OR interns OR internship OR resident OR
residents OR physician OR “medic* practi*” OR
doctor OR surgeon OR registrar).ab

2. (burnout OR stress OR resilien* OR fatigue).ab
3. physician impairment/ OR burnout, professional/
4. physicians/ OR physicians, psychology/ OR
physicians, family/ OR physicians, women

5. 1 OR 4
6. 2 OR 3
7. 6 AND 7
8. limit 8 to English language

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 18 of 19

Search strategy for CINAHL

1. (intern OR interns OR internship OR resident OR
residents OR physician OR “medic* practi*” OR
doctor OR surgeon OR registrar).ab

2. (burnout OR stress OR resilien* OR fatigue).ab
3. physicians/ OR surgeons/ OR anaesthesiologists/ OR
foreign medical graduates/ OR geriatricians/ OR
nephrologists/ OR paediatricians/ OR physician executives/
OR physicians, emergency/ OR physicians, family/ OR
physicians, sports team/ OR physicians, women/ OR
psychiatrists/ OR radiologists/ OR podiatrists/

4. burnout, professional/ OR stress, occupational/
5. 1 OR 3
6. 2 OR 4
7. 5 AND 6
8. limit 7 to English language

Search strategy for ProQuest

1. (intern OR interns OR internship OR resident OR
residents OR physician OR “medic* practi*” OR
doctor OR surgeon OR registrar).ab

2. (burnout OR stress OR resilien* OR fatigue).ab
3. 1 AND 2

Additional file

Additional file 1: PRISMA checklist, file contains the completed PRISMA
checklist for the systematic review. (DOC 65 kb)

Abbreviations
CASP: Critical Appraisal Skills Programme; CBT: Cognitive Behavioural Therapy;
CD-RISC: Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale; DP: Depersonalisation subscale of
MBI; DV: Dependent variable; EE: Emotional exhaustion subscale of MBI;
ESSI: Stress System Instrument; GHQ-12: General Health Questionnaire;
ITT: Intention to treat; MBI: Maslach Burnout Inventory; OSATS: Objective
Structured Assessment of Technical Skill; PA: Personal accomplishment subscale
of MBI; PRISMA: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews;
PSS: Perceived Stress Scale; RCT: Randomised controlled trial; SORT: Strength of
Recommendation Taxonomy; STAI: State-Trait Anxiety Inventory

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank research assistants Jessica Harrison and
Shane Poppleton for their assistance in the conduct of this review.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Funding
None to declare.

Availability of data and materials
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this
published article.

Authors’ contributions
Authors BC and MI contributed to the development of research questions,
the review protocol, screening and data extraction, analysis of data, and
writing of the manuscript. Author SM contributed to the development of
research questions, review protocol, and writing of the manuscript. Authors
RC, LC, and RP contributed to the development of research questions, the
review protocol, and development of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author details
1School of Psychology and Counselling, Institute for Resilient Regions,
University of Southern Queensland, 37 Sinnathamby Boulevard, Springfield
Central, QLD 4300, Australia. 2Cancer Nursing Professorial Precinct,
Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 3Royal
Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. 4School of Applied
Psychology, Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griffith University, Brisbane,
QLD, Australia. 5West Moreton Hospital and Health Service, Queensland
Health, Ipswich, QLD, Australia. 6Current address: School of Applied
Psychology, Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Griffith University, Gold
Coast Campus, 58 Parklands Drive, Southport, QLD 4215, Australia.

Received: 7 September 2016 Accepted: 16 June 2017

References
1. Willcock SM, Daly MG, Tennant CC, Allard BJ. Burnout and psychiatric
morbidity in new medical graduates. Med J Aust. 2004;181(7):357–60.
Shanafelt TD, Bradley KA, Wipf JE, Back AL. Burnout and self-reported
patient care in an internal medicine residency program. [Summary for
patients in Ann Intern Med. 2002 Mar 5;136(5):I29; PMID: 11874329]. Ann Int
Med. 2002;136(5):358–67.

2.

3. McCray LW, Cronholm PF, Bogner HR, Gallo JJ, Neill RA. Resident physician

burnout: is there hope? Fam Med. 2008;40(9):626–32.
Shanafelt TD, Boone S, Tan L, Dyrbye LN, Sotile W, Satele D, West CP, Sloan
J, Oreskovich MR. Burnout and satisfaction with work-life balance among US
physicians relative to the general US population. Arch Intern Med. 2012;
172(18):1377–85.
Ramirez AJ, Graham J, Richards MA, Cull A, Gregory WM. Mental health of
hospital consultants: the effects of stress and satisfaction at work. Lancet.
1996;347(9003):724–8.
Shanafelt TD, Balch CM, Bechamps G, Russell T, Dyrbye L, Satele D, Collicott
P, Novotny PJ, Sloan J, Freischlag J. Burnout and medical errors among
American surgeons. Ann Surg. 2010;251(6):995–1000.
Shanafelt TD, Balch CM, Bechamps GJ, Russell T, Dyrbye L, Satele D, Collicott
P, Novotny PJ, Sloan J, Freischlag JA. Burnout and career satisfaction among
American surgeons. Ann Surg. 2009;250(3):463–71.
Hall LH, Johnson J, Watt I, Tsipa A, O’Connor DB. Healthcare staff wellbeing,
burnout, and patient safety: a systematic review. PLoS One. 2016;11(7):
e0159015.
Dahlin ME, Runeson B. Burnout and psychiatric morbidity among medical
students entering clinical training: a three year prospective questionnaire
and interview-based study. BMC Med Educ. 2007;7(1):1.

10. Wurm W, Vogel K, Holl A, Ebner C, Bayer D, Mörkl S, Szilagyi I-S, Hotter E,
Kapfhammer H-P, Hofmann P. Depression-burnout overlap in physicians.
PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0149913.

11. Zhou J, Yang Y, Qiu X, Yang X, Pan H, Ban B, Qiao Z, Wang L, Wang W.

Relationship between anxiety and burnout among Chinese physicians: a
moderated mediation model. PLoS One. 2016;11(8):e0157013.

12. World Health Organisation. International Statistical Classification of Diseases
and Related Health Problems: ICD-10. Geneva: Switzerland: World Health
Organisation; 1992.
Iacovides A, Fountoulakis K, Kaprinis S, Kaprinis G. The relationship between job
stress, burnout and clinical depression. J Affect Disord. 2003;75(3):209–21.
14. Richardson KM, Rothstein HR. Effects of occupational stress management

13.

intervention programs: a meta-analysis. J Occup Health Psychol. 2008;13(1):69.
15. Maslach C, Jackson SE. Burnout in organizational settings. Appl Soc Psychol

Ann. 1984;5:133–53.

Clough et al. Systematic Reviews  (2017) 6:144 

Page 19 of 19

16. Maslach C, Jackson SE, Leiter MP. Maslach burnout inventory. 1986.
17.

Schaufeli WB, Leiter MP, Maslach C. Burnout: 35 years of research and
practice. Career Dev Int. 2009;14(3):204–20.

18. West CP, Huschka MM, Novotny PJ, Sloan JA, Kolars JC, Habermann TM,

19.

Shanafelt TD. Association of perceived medical errors with resident distress
and empathy: a prospective longitudinal study. JAMA. 2006;296(9):1071–8.
Krasner MS, Epstein RM, Beckman H, Suchman AL, Chapman B, Mooney CJ,
Quill TE. Association of an educational program in mindful communication
with burnout, empathy, and attitudes among primary care physicians.
JAMA. 2009;302(12):1284–93.

20. Wallace JE, Lemaire JB, Ghali WA. Physician wellness: a missing quality

indicator. Lancet. 2009;374(9702):1714–21.

21. Martini S, Arfken CL, Balon R. Comparison of burnout among medical

residents before and after the implementation of work hours limits. Acad
Psychiatry. 2006;30(4):352–5.

22. Gelfand DV, Podnos YD, Carmichael JC, Saltzman DJ, Wilson SE, Williams RA.
Effect of the 80-hour workweek on resident burnout. Arch Surg. 2004;139(9):
933–8. discussion 938-940.

23. Hutter MM, Kellogg KC, Ferguson CM, Abbott WM, Warshaw AL. The impact
of the 80-hour resident workweek on surgical residents and attending
surgeons. Ann Surg. 2006;243(6):864–71. discussion 871-865.

24. Gopal R, Glasheen JJ, Miyoshi TJ, Prochazka AV. Burnout and internal

medicine resident work-hour restrictions. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165(22):
2595–600.

25. Ro KE, Gude T, Tyssen R, Aasland OG. Counselling for burnout in Norwegian

doctors: one year cohort study. BMJ. 2008, 337(7679):No Pagination
Specified.

27.

26. Gunasingam N, Burns K, Edwards J, Dinh M, Walton M. Reducing stress and
burnout in junior doctors: the impact of debriefing sessions. Postgrad Med
J. 2015;91(1074):182–7.
Sood A, Sharma V, Schroeder DR, Gorman B. Stress Management and
Resiliency Training (SMART) program among Department of Radiology
faculty: a pilot randomized clinical trial. Explore. 2014;10(6):358–63.
28. Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG. Preferred reporting items for

systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Ann Intern
Med. 2009;151(4):264–9.

29. Practical Meta-Analysis Effect Size Calculator [https://www.campbellcollaboration.
org/this-is-a-web-based-effect-size-calculator/explore/this-is-a-web-based-effect-
size-calculator]. Accessed 29 June 2017.

30. CASP Checklists [http://www.casp-uk.net/casp-tools-checklists]. Accessed 29

31.

32.

June 2017.
Ebell MH, Siwek J, Weiss BD, Woolf SH, Susman J, Ewigman B, Bowman M.
Strength of recommendation taxonomy (SORT): a patient-centered approach
to grading evidence in the medical literature. J Am Board Fam Pract. 2004;
17(1):59–67.
Kotb AA, Mohamed KA-E, Kamel MH, Ismail MAR, Abdulmajeed AA.
Evaluating the effect of an educational program on level of professional
burnout among family physicians in the Faculty of Medicine-Suez Canal
University. Arab J Psychiatry. 2014;25(1):52–60.

33. Popenoe EJ, Ellen, Popenoe, Jean. The treatment of burnout in family

practice residents: theory and intervention (coping, balint group). 1984.
34. Winefield H, Farmer E, Denson L. Work stress management for women

general practitioners: an evaluation. Psychol Health Med. 1998;3(2):163–70.

35. Ospina-Kammerer V, Figley CR. An evaluation of the Respiratory One

Method (ROM) in reducing emotional exhaustion among family physician
residents. Int J Emerg Ment Health. 2003;5(1):29–32.

36. Margalit AP, Glick SM, Benbassat J, Cohen A, Katz M. Promoting a

biopsychosocial orientation in family practice: effect of two teaching
programs on the knowledge and attitudes of practising primary care
physicians. Med Teach. 2005;27(7):613–8.
Lemaire JB, Wallace JE, Lewin AM, de Grood J, Schaefer JP. The effect of a
biofeedback-based stress management tool on physician stress: a
randomized controlled clinical trial. Open Med. 2011;5(4):e154–163.
Shinefield JW. The effect of participating in a renewal skills workshop on
reducing HMO physician burnout. Ed.D. Ann Arbor: University of San
Francisco; 1994.

37.

38.

39. Pflugeisen BM, Drummond D, Ebersole D, Mundell K, Chen D. Brief video-

module administered mindfulness program for physicians: a pilot study.
Explore. 2016;12(1):50–4.

40. Arora S, Aggarwal R, Moran A, Sirimanna P, Crochet P, Darzi A, Kneebone R,
Sevdalis N. Mental practice: effective stress management training for novice
surgeons. J Am Coll Surg. 2011;212(2):225–33.

41. Wetzel CM, George A, Hanna GB, Athanasiou T, Black SA, Kneebone RL,

Nestel D, Woloshynowych M. Stress management training for surgeons—a
randomized, controlled, intervention study. Ann Surg. 2011;253(3):488–94.
42. Maher Z, Milner R, Cripe J, Gaughan J, Fish J, Goldberg AJ. Stress training for

the surgical resident. Am J Surg. 2013;205(2):169–74.

43. Milstein JM, Raingruber BJ, Bennett SH, Kon AA, Winn CA, Paterniti DA.
Burnout assessment in house officers: evaluation of an intervention to
reduce stress. Med Teach. 2009;31(4):338–41.

44. McCue JD, Sachs CL. A stress management workshop improves residents’

coping skills. Arch Intern Med. 1991;151(11):2273–7.

45. Bragard I, Etienne A-M, Merckaert I, Libert Y, Razavi D. Efficacy of a

communication and stress management training on medical residents’ self-
efficacy, stress to communicate and burnout: a randomized controlled
study. J Health Psychol. 2010;15(7):1075–81.

46. Bar-Sela G, Lulav-Grinwald D, Mitnik I. “Balint group” meetings for oncology
residents as a tool to improve therapeutic communication skills and reduce
burnout level. J Cancer Educ. 2012;27(4):786–9.

47. Ghetti C, Chang J, Gosman G. Burnout, psychological skills, and empathy:
balint training in obstetrics and gynecology residents. J Grad Med Educ.
2009;1(2):231–5.
Sood A, Prasad K, Schroeder D, Varkey P. Stress management and resilience
training among department of medicine faculty: a pilot randomized clinical
trial. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26(8):858–61.

48.

50.

49. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Rabatin JT, Call TG, Davidson JH, Multari A, Romanski
SA, Hellyer JMH, Sloan JA, Shanafelt TD. Intervention to promote physician
well-being, job satisfaction, and professionalism: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Int Med. 2014;174(4):527–33. 527p.
Isaksson Ro KE, Tyssen R, Hoffart A, Sexton H, Aasland OG, Gude T. A three-
year cohort study of the relationships between coping, job stress and
burnout after a counselling intervention for help-seeking physicians. BMC
Public Health. 2010;10:213.
Leon AC, Davis LL, Kraemer HC. The role and interpretation of pilot studies
in clinical research. J Psychiatr Res. 2011;45(5):626–9.

51.

52. Higgins JPT, Green S (eds.). Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of

53.

Interventions. Chichester: The Cochrane Collaboration; 2011.
Lau J, Ioannidis JP, Schmid CH. Quantitative synthesis in systematic reviews.
Ann Intern Med. 1997;127(9):820–6.

54. Devilly GJ, Ono M, Lohr JM. The use of meta-analytic software to derive
hypotheses for EMDR. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry. 2014;45:223–5.
55. Valentine JC, Thompson SG. Issues relating to confounding and meta-

analysis when including non-randomized studies in systematic reviews on
the effects of interventions. Res Synth Methods. 2013;4(1):26–35.

56. Attkisson CC, Zwick R. The Client Satisfaction Questionnaire: psychometric
properties and correlations with service utilization and psychotherapy
outcome. Eval Program Plann. 1982;5(3):233–7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central 
and we will help you at every step:

•  We accept pre-submission inquiries 
(cid:129)  Our selector tool helps you to ﬁnd the most relevant journal
(cid:129)  We provide round the clock customer support 
(cid:129)  Convenient online submission
(cid:129)  Thorough peer review
(cid:129)  Inclusion in PubMed and all major indexing services 
(cid:129)  Maximum visibility for your research

Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
