# Girma_2024_Understanding mental health stigma and discrimination in Ethiopia A qualitative study.

Cambridge Prisms: Global
Mental Health

www.cambridge.org/gmh

Research Article

Cite this article: Girma E, Ayele B,
Gronholm PC, Wahid SS, Hailemariam A,
Thornicroft G, Hanlon C and Kohrt B (2024).
Understanding mental health stigma and
discrimination in Ethiopia: A qualitative study.
Cambridge Prisms: Global Mental Health, 11,
e58, 1–9 https://doi.org/10.1017/gmh.2024.55.

Received: 25 October 2023
Revised: 02 April 2024
Accepted: 22 April 2024

Keywords:
Mental conditions; Stigmatization;
Discrimination; low and middle income
country; Ethiopia

Corresponding author:
Eshetu Girma;
Email: yaneteshetu@gmail.com

© The Author(s), 2024. Published by Cambridge
University Press. This is an Open Access article,
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution licence (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which
permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and
reproduction, provided the original article is
properly cited.

Understanding mental health stigma and
discrimination in Ethiopia: A qualitative study

, Bethel Ayele1, Petra C. Gronholm2

Eshetu Girma1
Ariam Hailemariam1, Graham Thornicroft2
Brandon Kohrt6

, Syed Shabab Wahid3

,

, Charlotte Hanlon4,5

and

1Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; 2Centre for
Global Mental Health and Centre for Implementation Science, Institute of Psychology, Psychiatry & Neuroscience, King’s
College London, London, UK; 3Department of Global Health, Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA; 4Centre for
Global Mental Health, Health Service and Population Research Department and WHO Collaborating Centre for Mental
Health Research and Training, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, UK;
5Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, College of Health Sciences, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia and 6Center for Global Mental Health Equity, The George Washington University, Washington DC, USA

Abstract

Background: Stigma is significantly impacted by cultural and contextual value systems. People
with mental health conditions frequently have to deal with the condition itself and the associated
stigma and discrimination. Contextual understanding is essential to design measures and
interventions.
Objective: This study aimed to explore the experiences and perceptions of people with mental
health conditions, their families and key stakeholders.
Method: A qualitative method used to understand mental health-related stigma and its local
contexts. Sixteen participants, including service users, caregivers, service providers and health
service administrators, were interviewed.
Result: People with mental health conditions and their caregivers experienced various forms of
stigmatization which is linked to attributions about the causality of the illness, overt manifest-
ations of mental health condition leading to easy identification and functional impairments that
adversely affect participation. Social contact, lived experiences sharing and training of service
providers are relevant intervention strategy to address stigma.
Implication: Stigma and exclusion are prominent in the experiences of people with mental
health conditions and their caregivers in this rural Ethiopian setting. Measurement of stigma and
the development of interventions should consider how stigma is socially constructed. Anti-
stigma interventions need to be implemented alongside expanded local access to mental
healthcare.

Impact statement

People with mental health conditions (MHCs) face major challenges due to negative stereotypes
and prejudice generated by misconceptions about MHCs. While research has gone a long way
toward understanding the multiple adverse impacts of MHCs in low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs), it is just starting to explain the social construct of mental health-related
stigma. Contextualization of stigma measures and development of anti-stigma programs in
LMICs are still limited. This study offers a valuable perspective on the experience of stigma and
the mechanisms underlying the stigmatization of individuals with mental illnesses and key
stakeholders. This enables a thorough investigation of the local context, focusing on the
viewpoints and understandings of persons who reside and work in the area. That also looked
at the stigma associated with mental health issues more broadly than from the perspective of a
particular illness or diagnosis. The present study can be effective in targeting the consequences of
stigma and understanding the interpretation of this stigma can aid in the development of
context-specific anti-stigma interventions in Ethiopia and provides input into the process of
assessing the implications and concept of stigma at a cross-national level. These interventions
endorse the use of social contact approaches to reduce stigma, which are acceptable as long as
they are combined with measures that foster a supportive environment, such as increased
availability of mental health services.

2

Introduction

The stigma associated with mental health conditions (MHCs)
remains a significant social issue, with no nation or culture placing
the same value on people with MHCs as those without (Rössler,
2016). It has been reported by those who have been impacted that
stigma can be worse than the MHC itself (Shrivastava et al., 2012;
Thornicroft et al., 2022). Stigma may have a variety of adverse
impacts on social inclusion, well-being, employment opportun-
ities, poverty and relationships (Hanlon, 2017), as well as imped-
ing healthcare seeking behaviors and contributing to the
nonavailability of quality mental healthcare (Pescosolido and
Martin, 2015; Subu et al., 2021). The idea of stigma can be divided
into two categories: action-oriented: public stigma (The general
public’s endorsement of prejudice and discrimination), structural
stigma (discrimination via laws, regulations and constitutional
norms), courtesy stigma (discrimination, and preconceptions that
are gained through relationships with stigmatized individuals or
groups), provider-based stigma (prejudice and discrimination by
professional associations assigned to support marginalized com-
munities) and self-stigma (when the stigmatized group accept the
public stigma as true and internalized to their own lives) which
generally specify who or what gives or gets the stigma and experi-
ential: perceived (a viewpoint that “the majority of people” believe
to have), endorsed (indicating support for discrimination, preju-
dice and stereotypes), anticipated (awaiting experiences with
prejudice and discrimination), received (direct encounters with
devaluation or rejection) and enacted stigma (displaying preju-
diced actions/behavior) that explain how stigma arises (Gronholm
et al., 2017).

There has been increased research interest in developing and
evaluating interventions that seek to address stigma and discrim-
ination against people with MHCs (Clay et al., 2020). Systematic
reviews of
the efficacy of such interventions indicate that
education-based interventions (addressing myths and misconcep-
tions) and social contact-based interventions involving direct or
indirect interactions with people who have the stigmatized condi-
tion) have small to moderate effect sizes on stigma reduction in the
short- to medium-term (Waqas et al., 2020; Makhmud et al., 2022).
In a recent review of studies from low- and middle-income coun-
tries (LMICs), several approaches to reducing stigma related to
MHC had been evaluated, but social contact was barely used even
though the evidence base is strongest for this approach. Existing
studies from LMICs are limited by methodologically weak research
designs and minimal use of local expertise. Furthermore, the
authors found that studies were restricted to a limited number of
LMICs (Clay et al., 2020).

The effectiveness of interventions designed to lessen stigma
and discrimination in the local community has not received much
attention from research studies published in LMICs (Kapungwe
et al., 2010; Thornicroft et al., 2022). Despite the fact that pro-
grams working with marginalized or stigmatized groups fre-
there is a
quently include community awareness-raising,
shortage of evidence regarding whether awareness-raising strat-
egies alone are effective in reducing stigma in the community,
especially with regard to changes beyond knowledge, covering the
crucial areas of attitudes and behavior (Thornicroft et al., 2007).
Other strategies, such as social contact interventions, have been
shown to be one of the most effective ways to promote behavior
change, as evidenced by a decrease in the use of discriminatory
practices by community members (Thornicroft et al., 2016;
Shahwan et al., 2022).

Eshetu Girma et al.

In Ethiopia, people still viewed mental health problems as curses
from God (Zeleke et al., 2019). Ethiopians have a distinct cultural
and traditional understanding of mental illness that primarily links
it to spiritual origins, disruptions in the divine-human relationship,
and the “curse” or punishment of God on wrong dowers (Jacobsson
and Merdasa, 1991; Zeleke et al., 2019). Mental illnesses were
associated with psychocultural inappropriateness or engaging in
taboo (Monteiro and Balogun, 2014). The idea of what causes
mental illness and how society characterizes those people with
MHC creates stigma. This is due to the fear that individuals with
mental illness may harm others (Yeshanew et al., 2020).

In order to successfully reduce stigmatization and improve the
experience of service users, anti-stigma interventions need to be
developed, modified and implemented in a specific local context.
Analyzing the various kinds of stigma and identifying the specific
groups affected is essential for developing effective strategies for
lowering stigma and prejudice (Gronholm et al., 2017). A synthesis
of evidence on mental health stigma and discrimination in Ethiopia
highlighted the lack of in-depth understanding of the concepts of
stigma and discrimination in this setting, and the need for effective
stigma reduction interventions that are contextually designed and
involve all key stakeholders (service user, service providers, com-
munity representatives, service developers and policy makers)
(Girma et al., 2022).

This work is a part of the International Study of Discrimination
and Stigma Outcomes (INDIGO) project, a long-running global
network of initiatives in stigma reduction, which gave rise to the
INDIGO Partnership research program, implemented in five coun-
tries (Gronholm et al., 2023). This study aims to explore on what the
experiences and perceptions of individuals with MHCs regarding
stigma are, and how these perceptions looks across different stake-
holders, including family members and key stakeholders within
mental health services in the Ethiopia context, can be addressed.

Methods

Study design and setting

A descriptive qualitative approach was used to obtain an in-depth
understanding of the local context based on the viewpoints and
perspectives of those who reside and work in the research area. This
study was conducted in the south Sodo and Sodo districts of
Ethiopia, which are 84 km south of Addis Ababa, the capital of
Ethiopia. The district had an estimated total population of 189,970
people as of 2021, as projected by the Ethiopian Central Statistics
Agency. The district has 58 health posts, 8 health centers and a
primary hospital. Within Ethiopia’s three-tier health system, these
facilities offer primary level care. Ethiopian society is largely reli-
gious (Mihretu, 2019). The most popular method of treating mental
illnesses in Ethiopia is holy water, which is used by Orthodox
Christians (Hannig, 2013). This area has been a population and
study base for essential health research and intervention a collab-
orative program between the then department of Community
Health (now School of Public Health), Faculty of Medicine, Addis
Ababa University for the past 38 years. The findings of this study
will be used as input for the preparation of locally tailored anti-
stigma programs prevention.

Participant selection

A purposive sampling technique was used to identify respondents
for the in-depth interviews. The predetermined characteristics of

Cambridge Prisms: Global Mental Health

3

the selection participants included the following: key stakeholder
groups in the community were people with lived experience
(PWLE) of MHCs, family caregivers, health professionals and staff
members working in the healthcare setting. Gender and various
religious groups were also taken into account. Health facilities in the
Sodo district were first contacted by the Addis Ababa University-
led INDIGO partnership program to identify volunteer candidates
who met the eligibility requirements. These included people who
have received a medical diagnosis of an MHC, as well as their
caregivers, and those who intended to live in the program region
for the duration of the upcoming anti-stigma intervention imple-
mentation period (as the same individuals were required for the
anti-stigma intervention to be implemented). Health professionals
who are active participants in mental health departments from
different health facilities located in the Sodo district area were also
included. Following this, a team from the Ethiopia site specifically
approached the qualified participants to verify their voluntarism,
ensure that they are not being coerced into participating in the
program, and give them a brief overview of the study plan, project,
and other pertinent information. They also informed them of their
right to withdraw from the program at any point during data
collection. The target MHCs for this study incorporate those major
mental health cases in Ethiopia and identified in the Mental Health
Gap Action Programme module and: these are depression, psych-
osis, bipolar disorders and alcohol use disorder.

format. As a result, the description was completed in accordance
with the thematic areas. The credibility of the results was main-
tained by peer debriefing, and prolonged participation. To ensure
reliability peer review is conducted in terms of dependability, the
consistency was checked in the findings. A detailed description, of
place, context and culture in the research process helped the
transferability of the study.

Results

The 16 participants were mental health service users (PWLEs),
caregivers, heads/health administrative leaders, psychiatric nurses,
public health officers (see Table 1).

The findings are presented under

themes,
(i) explanatory model of stigma and discrimination, (ii) what mat-
ters most, (iii) different types of stigma and discrimination and
(iv) local concepts toward the interventions on anti-stigma and
stigma-related barriers.

four major

Explanatory models of stigma and discrimination

This describes the perceived and experienced explanatory condi-
tions of stigma and discrimination, encompassing explanations of
name or label, manifestations, causes and help seeking.

Procedures

Table 1. Demographic characteristic of study participants

A total of 16 participants were involved in the study. The number of
participants was determined after the data saturation level was
achieved during data collection and coding. New data points were
found to be replicating patterns that already existed without sig-
nificantly adding new information. The interviews took place over
one or two sessions, depending on participant preference and
availability, with each session lasting about 40–50 min using an
Amharic-language topic guide. The INDIGO local (Ethiopian)
researchers site team conducted semi-structured interviews which
adapted and translated into an Amharic version from the prede-
fined frameworks which contains questions about participants’
experiences with stigma and discrimination as well as explanatory
models of MHC and local concepts related to interventions against
stigma and discrimination. All collected data were audio recorded.
All authors participated in the design of the study and development
of interview guides and the coding framework.

Data analysis

The adopted interview guide was translated in to Amharic lan-
guage. All collected data were coded and transcribed verbatim in
Amharic and translated into English by Ethiopia site team (EG, BA,
AH). Inter-coder agreement was checked using a sample of tran-
scriptions and inconsistencies were discussed so that the different
coders reached to the same level of understanding of each code.
Following this, the data analysis for this site specific paper done by
EG and BA. The data were analyzed deductively from coding frame
that derives from two sources: (1) The explanatory model frame-
work developed by Arthur Kleinman (Kleinman, 1980) and (2) the
“What matters most” anthropological concept of understanding
stigma (Yang et al., 2014a; 2014b; see Supplementary Table S1 for
detail that formed a base for organizing thematic analysis and as a
foundation for topic organization). In this step, related concepts
from the fundamental themes were grouped together into an
organizing theme, which summarize the concepts into a structured

Type of
participant

No.

Gender

Age

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Service user

Male

Service user

Male

Service user

Service user

Female

Female

73

40

43

23

Service user

Female

39

Caregivers

Caregivers

Male

Male

60

32

Caregivers

Female

57

Caregivers

Female

52

Level of
education

Elementary
school

Elementary
school

Religion

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Not educated

Protestant

Secondary
education

Secondary
education

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Not educated

Protestant

Elementary
school

Elementary
school

Secondary
education

10.

11.

Heads/health
administrators

Heads/health
administrators

Male

48

MSc

Male

53

MPH

12.

Service provider

Male

36

Health officer

13.

Service provider

Male

14.

Service provider

Male

29

31

Psychiatric
nurse

Psychiatric
nurse

15.

Service provider

Male

27

BSc nurse

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Muslim

Ethiopian
Orthodox

Ethiopian
Orthodox

16.

Service provider

Female

24

Health officer

Protestant

4

Eshetu Girma et al.

Labels and terms used
A range of derogatory and stigmatizing terms for people affected by
severe MHCs (e.g., psychosis) were identified.

By far, the most commonly used term by all groups of study
participants was “Ebde”, which refers to a “mad person” or “crazy
person”. Most often, this name is given to those people who walk on
the street without clothes or display overt manifestations of severe
MHCs. The name “Qews” was also widely mentioned by respond-
ents and frequently stated by service users, referring to those who
cannot control their actions. The other labels, mostly reported by
mental health service users and caregivers, were “Nic” means that
the patient’s brain is injured (the patient’s brain is not functioning
properly), “Ye AymeroChinqet”
and
‘Gemash Amanuel” (indicating “crazy” or “mentally unstable; the
name “Amanuel” refers to a well-known psychiatric hospital which
is heavily stigmatized). The other identified local name or term used
specifically in Gurage zone, where the data collection took place,
was “Shiregna” (Guragegna language to mean ‘mad person’).

(mental disturbance)

A number of service users mentioned that they did not know
these commonly used names given to MHCs and one service user
indicated that he did not know the name of the condition affecting
him, stating the reason as:

“Maybe they didn’t want to tell me not to make me worried”. (Male
service user, alcohol use disorder, Ethiopian orthodox).

From the service providers’ side, the majority indicated that the
most commonly recorded cases were psychosis, epilepsy and
depression. A particular participant stated that:

For depression the people usually say “Jezbual” (became lazy) and for
bi-polar patients (manic phase) say “Neklual” or “Tesh Argual”
(meaning that the person could not think normally or clearly)
(Service provider, Male, Muslim, Psychiatric nurse).

According to the participants, harming others,

Manifestations
This section shows people recognize mental health problems and
the types of stigmatizing attitudes and behaviors toward PWLEs.
throwing
stones, being seen chained in public, disturbing the neighborhood,
trying to flee from home or holy water or other religious places,
and walking naked in the street were highly lead to negative
assumptions about the person and stigmatization by the commu-
nity. From the perspective of service users, the most commonly
mentioned features were trying to attempt suicide through hang-
ing themselves or drinking poisonous substances, losing con-
sciousness and doing things unknowingly. These were all
perceived to contribute to being identified as a ‘mad person’ and
stigmatized by society. The majority of participants identified
manifestations like excessive talking (even though the person felt
normal),
lack of sleep, decreased appetite and hallucinations
(particularly at night), and tended to make generalizations about
people with MHCs, characterizing them as causing disturbances
and as violent people.

The family members give us other information; like, that the
patient is disturbing, they were trying to fire the house, they do not
sleep well, they talk too much, they tried to escape at night from Holly
water or other religious places (Service provider, Male, Ethiopian
orthodox, Health officer).

The level of stigma toward people with MHCs was classified by
respondents as falling on a dimension ranging from those who were
called “crazy” to those who were “calm” (please see preceding
section on “labels and terms” for local language terminology).

Included within the commonly mentioned “crazy” designation
were those who were perceived to create a disturbance in the
surroundings, were violent toward other people, or were not appro-
priately clothed or ‘spoke suddenly and seemingly without their
own will’ or were observed talking to themselves. In general, these
people were considered to have been possessed by an ‘evil spirit’.
“She showed the signs of an evil spirit, speaking out of the blue like
other people do when they are possessed by one, so I took her to the
holy water
(healing approach linked to Orthodox Christian
churches).” (Male, Ethiopian orthodox, Caregiver).
“…Transportation might not be available and the patients might not
be calm and they will create disturbance to bring mentally ill patients
from rural to urban area for treatment…” (Male service user, Ethi-
opian orthodox, Alcohol use disorder).

The “calm” description included those people with MHC who were
emphasized to have acceptable behavior and speech. There was an
implication that being in the “calm” group was preferable for
individuals to lessen stigma. In this quote, the caregiver appears
to be trying to emphasize that their loved one does not fall under the
‘crazy’ category.

“…My sons do not use violence, or insult others. They are simply too
quiet, and people notice that they don’t bother or beat anyone …”
(Female caregiver, Ethiopian orthodox).

Causes
This section outlines the possible explanations of the cause of
MHCs and the reasons claimed for the use of the stigmatizing
terminologies. The most frequently proposed cause of MHCs raised
by almost all groups of participants was a supernatural or religious
nature. Many did not perceive MHCs as a disease, but rather as the
result of bad spirits, witchcraft, and being cursed because of his/her
and/or family’s inappropriate actions or sinful acts. Others believed
that people were poisoned by harmful traditional drugs given to
them by either friends or enemies.

“Yes, in our society, majority of people have limited knowledge
and awareness on mental illness. Therefore, do not consider men-
tal illness as a disease, rather they believe it is related to bad spirit.
Many families or caregivers take the patients to religious places
nearby most of the time “Tsebel”” (Holy water, since Orthodox
religion dominates in the area). (Male service provider, Ethiopian
orthodox, Nurse).

Stigmatization and discrimination against people with MHCs
were associated with assumptions about the cause of illness. In this
analysis, the other suggested causes were alcohol addiction, use of
Khat (Catha edulis; a plant chewed commonly in East Africa and
some Arab countries that has amphetamine-like properties), or
other types of substance use. People were reported to have various
reasons for starting to use substances that were also believed to be
associated with the development of MHCs. The main ones stated by
the participants were loss of family members/close relatives, failure
at school and loss of business or being robbed of their property. All
these were considered as stressors that could lead either to addiction
or directly to MHCs. This explanation was primarily raised by the
service providers.

In cities like Butajira and Welkite (cities where the drug “Khat” is
abundant) you will find more people with psychosis on the road trying
to gather “Khat” leftovers. It will not be hard to judge that most of the
people searching Khat are psychotic patients; even some of them are
totally naked. (Male service provider, Psychiatric nurse Muslim,
Hospital).

Cambridge Prisms: Global Mental Health

5

The other explanation was poverty or living in low socioeconomic
status, which was similarly associated with stressors and having
limited access to healthcare services. In some cases, caregivers
confined those with a severe MHC at home and chained them
because they could not afford the treatment costs.

psychosis: that the healthcare worker may get sick from long
exposure to people with health conditions:

“As a fresh health worker, I used to fear that maybe the “shared
psychosis” is true and that I should change working in the department
of mental health services” (Male service provider, psychiatric nurse,
Ethiopian orthodox).

Help seeking category
Stigmatized groups tended to seek or expect help from different
parts of the community. Service users and caregivers preferred to
look for a solution from religious institutions first, for example,
“Tsebel” (Holy water in Orthodox religion) or to a Quran house (for
Muslims), and considered health facilities to be the last resort most
of the time. If the person’s condition did not improve, the caregivers
would take them to other more well-known holy water site and stay
there for weeks or even months. Being told to stop taking prescribed
medicine and only being treated with holy water are some issues
with religious settings that prevented people from receiving or
accessing treatment.

The Protestant Christian religion was reported to pray for the
person and claim that the person was cured, thus discouraging help
seeking from the health system. While Muslims engaged in prac-
tices like gathering religious leaders, relatives and elders together,
chewing “Khat” and praying for the person, then saying that they
are healed and do not need to take medicine any more. Another
place to seek healing was from traditional healers or sorcerers.

Instead of bringing the patient on early stage of the illness they prefer
to take them to traditional healers or to “Tenquway” (sorcerers) or
take them far from their community. Then seeking health care service
after it becomes chronic (service provider, male, Ethiopian orthodox,
health officer).

Another frequently noted source of help and support was from
friends. Many service users stated that they received advice, sup-
port/encouragement and motivation to stay strong from their
friends.

“My friend helped to rent house and start treatment in Butajira
hospital. She and her husband advised and helped me financially.”
(Female service user, Protestant, Psychosis).

Additionally, there was support from family members and some-
times from others in their community. Some respondents expressed
that the preferred places to seek help was also from healthcare
facilities and healthcare workers, (Butajira Hospital, Buei Hospital
and Amanuel mental hospitals were frequently mentioned health-
care facilities). The community-based health extension workers
were reported to play an important role in creating community
awareness, tracing and bringing people with MHCs to health
facilities, carrying out follow-up and being friendly with caregivers
and encouraging people with MHCs to take their medication.
“There is good work done by health care centers in collaboration with
health extension workers. Those who are staying at home are well
taken care of by health extension workers during their house visits
and routine follow ups.” (Male, Ethiopian orthodox urban hospital
head)

Predominant stereotypes and attitudes
toward people with MHCs
Prevailing community attitudes
included the following: mental illness could not be cured (with
medicine or any other means), mental health illness can be trans-
mitted and the condition is hereditary, and all people with MHCs
are assumed to be dangerous and violent. In addition, among
there was a concept of shared/contagious
service providers,

What matters the most

The service user and caregiver described expectations in relation to
functional role and socially significant matters.

Functional role and what matter most
The perceived functional impairment or dysfunction associated
with stigmatized identity is described in this section. Respondents
highlighted being unable to contribute to important and expected
like Idir (traditional self-help association that
social activities,
assists grieving families financially, materially and emotionally at
the time of a death) and Mahiber (an association or grouping of
people with social responsibilities existed in different cultural,
religious and socioeconomic contexts) as key indicators of dysfunc-
tion that mark out those with MHCs. Inability to complete school,
which is more of an issue for younger people with MHC, the
inability to find a job and make a living, and the fear of social
interaction, were also cited by respondents as problematic. Add-
itionally, being impaired in taking care of oneself, including not
knowing how to wash one’s body or dressing oneself, and particu-
larly female participants finding it difficult to take care of household
and family responsibilities were salient aspects of functionality
according to study participants.

“I think the community expects me to take care of myself, but I
couldn’t take care of my family and control my house and to have
job” (Female service user, Ethiopian orthodox, Depression).

Type and sources of stigma and discrimination

The different types of stigma experienced by service users and
caregivers included (i) self-stigma; (ii) courtesy stigma and
(iii) public, institutional and professional stigma.

Self-stigma
Participants reported experiencing a feeling of shame and blaming
themselves which sometimes led them to refuse to take their
medication, isolate themselves from society, stop engaging in vari-
ous social activities, avoid social
interactions and potentially
resulted in suicidal ideation and wanting to disappear from their
locality and from the community as a result of feeling bad and
lonely.

I caused problem in my family. But I was thinking about attempting
suicide and wanted to escape from my home and from the commu-
nity. (Female service user, Ethiopian orthodox Psychosis).

Courtesy stigma
This reflects the experience stigma and discrimination of caregivers
and service providers because of their association or relationship
with people with an MHC.

A female caregiver urban house stated,
“I rented the house using another person’s name and paid monthly
using that person. We moved in at night when the owners were out of
the city so that they would not notice”. (Female caregiver Ethiopian
orthodox).

6

Eshetu Girma et al.

Public, institutional and professional stigma
The following section presents the stigmatizing behaviors that
the targeted group experiences and anticipates. Service users
faced isolation and discrimination from the community (not
wanting to go to their house and unwilling to be visited by
them), locking them behind doors and holding them in chains
by their caregivers/family because of their illness (fear they may
come to harm or cause trouble) and most of the time to avoid
shame. There were also reports of exclusion from public trans-
portation, as it was anticipated that the illness would cause some
disturbance.

I used to be isolated and discriminated by my neighbors and by my
husband’s relatives. They do not want me to go to their house and
they did not come to visit me either. My neighbors did not allow me
to participate in social activities and I felt bad and felt lonely. Even
they will not accept my thoughts and words seriously since they
think am crazy. (Female service user, Ethiopian orthodox, depres-
sion).

With regard to institutional stigma, for those attending healthcare
facilities, an unwelcoming environment for mental health service
users was reported, especially in governmental health facilities
compared to private institutes and poor law enforcement trend as
not treating people with MHCs respectfully and may disregard their
complaints. Lack of resources and essential mental health medica-
tions, disorganized departments and shortage of health profes-
sionals in the psychiatric department were also reported.

“Yes, there are some challenges especially on the law enforcement, if
the patients cause harm the police officers request us to report the
patients follow up history in order to confirm if they are mentally ill
or not. Nevertheless, most of the time they do not use our report as
evidence. Even sometimes the police insult them, they do not accept
their complaints”. (Female service provider, protestant, health
officer).

Healthcare professionals were also reported to show stigmatizing
behaviors toward service users by refusing to engage in conversa-
tion with them, not giving them directions in the health compound,
giving other patients who are seeking treatment for physical ill-
nesses priority, mistreating them and failing to give them the
attention they need.

“Once I went hospital to get birth and I was treated differently than
other delivering mothers. The nurses were asking how they and their
newborn were doing but no one asked me that and I feel sad and cried.
I was asking myself why they ignored me.” (Female service user,
protestant, psychosis).

Service users reported, unable to seek medical attention from
healthcare providers or withdrew from follow-up appointments
and medication, fueling loss of hope, feelings of frustration and
even suicide attempts.

Among healthcare professionals specific to mental health, the
workload (long working hours) and lesser training opportunities
compared to other health disciplines made them susceptible to
frustration and discouragement. This was also considered a
concern because inadequate training and support could result
in incorrect diagnoses and failures to rule out potential condi-
tions, as well as failures to administer the appropriate dosages of
medication.

“Other than that through my five years working experience, there was
no trainings initiated by the government. So, it is difficult to update
myself and I sometimes question myself if I am giving the patients the
appropriate and updated treatment” (Service provider, psychiatric
nurse, Muslim.

Local concepts related to evidence-based interventions
against stigma and discrimination

Social contact
Most respondents suggested safe spaces and good settings to
make social contact are; where the person resides, which could
be in their surrounding or in religious places, a village meeting
where the local leader facilitates, the government meeting halls
like the district administration hall and the city administration
halls that can be easily accessible. A particular participant recom-
mended that:

“If better comfort is needed there is a great private meeting hall in
Butajera and it also could be at hospital own meeting hall.” (Male
service user, Ethiopian orthodox, Alcohol use disorder).

Acceptable contact
Different participants provided their preferences on how and
with whom the healthcare worker social contact
training
should be carried out. According to participants, the majority
preferred or would be willing to be trained with the community,
implying a chance for service users to explain about how they
were treated, what they feel and their need from healthcare
providers, so that they would not repeat the mistreatment. In
addition, to support implementation, they recommended to
assign budget or simple refreshment in order to create awareness
in the community.

Others supported the involvement of people with MHCs who
had recovered in training courses, because of they can explain better
about MHC than non-patients or healthcare providers can, which
will help the community to build trust on the healthcare facility, and
motivate and boost the person’s confidence.

Some suggested for the training to be held separately, indicating
that the level of understanding varies and the need for preparatory
work with health workers ahead of social contact interventions.

“As far as I saw these patients are usually not educated. So I do not
think health professionals and mentally ill patients could understand
the training equally” (Male service provider BSc nurse, Ethiopian
orthodox). In addition, a particular service provider indicated that
training is not needed at all,

“I do not think training is needed; rather regulations from
government are necessary in the area” (Male, service provider,
Ethiopian orthodox, health officer).

The following figure summaries people with MHCs in the
Ethiopian setting. Various forms of stigmatization which is
linked to attributions about the causality of the illness (mainly
related to religious factors, alcohol use and stressors), overt
manifestations of MHC (often untreated) leading to easy identi-
fication and functional impairments that leads to derogatory
labeling adversely affect participation in what is most important
to the community (social obligations, family and work). The
findings also indicated that social contact is a suitable and rele-
vant intervention strategy to address this different form of stigma
when it adds up with increasing access of mental health service
(Figure 1).

Discussion
This study sought to explore key stakeholders’ perceptions and
experiences about mental health-related stigmatization in the rural
Ethiopian context. The findings indicate that people with MHCs,
together with those who care for them, experience stigma in diverse
ways as a consequence of the different manifestations of their

Cambridge Prisms: Global Mental Health

7

Figure 1. Explanatory models, types of stigma and strategies to combatmental illness stigma and discrimination, Ethiopia, 2024.

illnesses, the various labels that have been assigned to them, and
beliefs and attitudes of the community that adversely impact their
lives in social and individual domains.

In psychiatric practice, mental healthcare professionals use
labels based on international diagnostic systems, for example, the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders guide,
whereby mental “illnesses” have well defined categories and criteria
to identify the particular syndrome or illness a person is experien-
cing (Black and Grant, 2014). However, some people in the com-
munity generally refer to people with MHCs with derogatory terms
or stigmatizing labels. A study in India stated that the term or
adjective that the family uses most frequently Aalsi was the laziest,
followed by sustt and for lethargy and the two terms/adjectives that
friends or coworkers most frequently used were paagal (mad) and
darpok (coward) (Grover et al., 2020). Our study in Ethiopia found
that, people with MHCs are generalized as violent and disturbance
and that various negative labels tended to link to particular types of
MHC. Laziness and becoming slothful to depression, and for the
severe mental disorder related to “crazy”, becoming insane and
losing one’s mind or lack of self-control.

Stigma and social identification are closely related (Klik et al.,
2019). Symptoms of mental illness as aggression and nakedness in
the public leads to identify people with mental illness as distinctive
and make them vulnerable to stigma from the general public
(Kimotho, 2018). Greater symptom severity of the mental illness
makes people more susceptible to the negative impacts of expected
stigma (Fox et al., 2018). This might hold especially true in the
context of this study mainly where treatment coverage is low and
most people with MHCs have not received care. Stigmatization of
people with MHCs was also very likely to result from severe
manifestations of MHCs, or behaviors perceived as causing trouble.

Poor access to mental healthcare reinforces this stereotype because
MHCs are not treated early or adequately and symptoms risk
escalation. A previous study conducted in the same rural districts
demonstrated that stigma and discrimination reduced when mental
healthcare was made locally available integrated within primary
healthcare (Tirfessa et al., 2020). This underlines the importance of
combining anti-stigma interventions with increased access to men-
tal healthcare.

The perceptions of what causes MHCs are mostly related to
cultural ideas about MCHs. a study on perceptions of mental
health condition in Ethiopia shows religious/spiritual, disaster
and economic deprivation, substance abuse were the most
frequent response regarding perceived causes of MHCs as
depression and anxiety (Monteiro and Balogun, 2014). This
was also reiterated in this study, religious causes (curses, pos-
session by spirits), and addiction to alcohol, Khat and stressors
such as loss of family member/close relatives, loss of employ-
ment and poor socioeconomic status were mentioned as causes
of MHCs.

Religious rituals were the first choice for care for people with
MHCs in this study, and in previous studies from Ethiopia (Kasa
and Kaba, 2023). Adult users of holy water had a prevalence of
common mental disease (Belete et al., 2023). Our finding high-
lighted that most service users and caregivers prefer to first turn to
religious institutions for a solution, to the Quran home or to
“Tsebel,” the Holy Water of Orthodox religion, with medical facil-
ities being the last resort. Such evidence was also found, in Jordan,
employing ’Rukia,’ praying, and reading the Holy Quran or other
religious books could help heal mental illness; with such beliefs
related to higher stigma for both people with MHCs and mental
health in general (Al-Rawashdeh et al., 2021).

8

Eshetu Girma et al.

People with severe MHC were more likely to have functional
impairment due to the severity of their manifestations, internalized
stigma and ongoing illness (Habtamu et al., 2018). In rural parts of
Ethiopia, the most highly regarded functional impairment domains,
closely linked to what matters most to the community, include the
capacity to carry out social obligations, maintain self-care, participate
in family life and perform productively at work (Habtamu et al.,
2015). In this study, we also identified that people with MHCs were
less likely to engage in expected roles and what was considered most
important to the community such as to be able to participate in social
activities, finding a job, finishing school, taking care of oneself and
leading the family, thus making MHCs a potent source of stigma.

Along with the actual MHC, self-stigma is one of the biggest
obstacles that people with MHCs must overcome. Lower levels of
adherence to treatment are linked to a higher degree of self-stigma
(Assefa et al., 2012; Carrara and Ventura, 2018). Our findings also
support that self-stigmatization leads people with MHCs to neglect
their medication intake and experience social isolation.

Public stigma, or how the general public feels about a group that
has been stigmatized, can be understood as consisting of three
different components (Corrigan, 2016; Thornicroft et al., 2016).
Initially, there may be a problem of knowledge about mental health
or mental illness. The second is a negative emotional response to a
person with a mental health problem, namely prejudice that sig-
nificantly impacted negatively by a person who are stigmatized,
which also enhances people’s desire
isolation
(Angermeyer and Matschinger, 2003). Discrimination is a third
way that prejudice manifests itself behaviorally (Angermeyer and
Matschinger, 2003; Corrigan, 2004). Our study participants were
noted to be excluded from society; emphasized as “staying at
home,” and, in regards to discrimination social exclusion and
limitation on using public services like transportation were also
evident in this study.

social

for

In terms of institutional stigma, there was evidence of an
unequal allocation of resources between physical and mental health
at different levels of the healthcare system, particularly in regions
where there is a dearth of mental health service providers. This has
been reported in other settings,
including a relative lack of
resources, access to vital medications and personnel concerns
differentially affecting mental healthcare (Pugh et al., 2015; Thor-
nicroft et al., 2022). This study also found that both service users
and providers were impacted by the government’s lack of attention
to the mental health sector, which was evident in the lack of capacity
building of healthcare professionals, in not hiring mental health
professionals, inadequate provision of medications and in the lack
of comprehensive care (including psychosocial care). People with
MHCs were rendered unable to seek medical attention from health-
care providers or withdrew from follow-up appointments and
medication, which contributed to losing hope, feeling frustrated
and even attempting suicide.

Limitation

While this study evaluated some important stakeholders in mental
health, it did not consider the stigma within the larger population
including religious leaders and traditional healers and was
restricted to a specific subset of healthcare practitioners.

Conclusions

To conclude, our findings have implications for both measure-
ments of stigma and the development of interventions. Measures

need to tap into contextually important aspects of stigma. The focus
of respondents on the behavioral consequences of stigma, particu-
larly exclusion, might support the use of measures that focus on
discrimination rather than attitudes. In terms of intervention, social
contact was seen as relevant and an acceptable approach, likely to be
most impactful if the individual was from the local community.
Alongside social contact, it is essential to create an enabling envir-
onment, with training of service providers in working collabora-
tively with service users, raising community awareness and
(crucially) expanding access to mental healthcare in the local
community.

Abbreviations
AUD
Alcohol use disorder
PWLEs People with lived experiences
MCHs Mental health conditions

Open peer review. To view the open peer review materials for this article,
please visit http://doi.org/10.1017/gmh.2024.55.

Supplementary material. The supplementary material for this article can be
found at http://doi.org/10.1017/gmh.2024.55.

Data availability statement. The data that support the findings of this study
are available from the corresponding author, (EG), upon reasonable request.

Acknowledgments. G.T. is supported by the National Institute for Health and
Care Research (NIHR) Applied Research Collaboration South London (NIHR
ARC South London) at King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. The
views expressed are those of the author (s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR
or the Department of Health and Social Care. G.T. is also supported by the UK
Medical Research Council (UKRI) for the Indigo Partnership (MR/R023697/1)
award. For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a Creative
‘Open
Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (where permitted by UKRI,
Government License’ or ‘Creative Commons Attribution No-derivatives
[CC BY-ND] license’ may be stated instead) to any Author Accepted Manu-
script version arising.

Author contribution. E.G. and B.A., leads the data collection, analysis and
completed the first draft of the manuscript. G.T. obtained funding, supervised
the study and commented on this manuscript. B.A.K. and S.S.W. conceptualized
and designed the qualitative study for Work Package 2 of the INDIGO Part-
nership, developed the qualitative interview guides and supervised the study. All
authors contributed to significant revisions of the manuscript and approved the
final manuscript .

Financial support. P.C.G. is supported by the UK Medical Research Council
(UKRI) for the Indigo Partnership (MR/R023697/1) award. C.H. receives sup-
port from the National Institute of Health and Care Research through the NIHR
Global Health Research Group on Homelessness and Mental Health in Africa
(NIHR134325) and the SPARK project (NIHR200842) using UK aid from the
UK Government. The views expressed in this publication are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health
and Social Care. C.H. receives support from the welcome Trust through grants
222154/Z20/Z and 223615/Z/21/Z.

Competing interest. The authors confirm that they have NO affiliations with
or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial interest (such as
honoraria; stock ownership or other equity interest; and expert testimony or
patent-licensing arrangements), or nonfinancial interest (such as personal or
professional relationships, affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) in the subject
matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.

Ethics statement. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of the College of Health Sciences, Addis Ababa University (protocol number
072/19/SPH and from the research ethics office of King’s College London [KCL],
study Reference: HR-18/19-8719). The municipal authority granted explicit

Cambridge Prisms: Global Mental Health

9

approval in writing for the data collection. Informed consent were gathered
from all eligible participants after explaining to the participants that their
answers would remain confidential and that they might end the interview at
any time.

References

Al-Rawashdeh AB, Alnjadat RM, Younis MB, Rayan A, Harb A, Al-Aaraj H.
(2021) Cultural misconceptions and public stigma about mental illness.
Indian Journal of Forensic Medicine & Toxicology 15(2), 1873–1878.

Angermeyer MC and Matschinger H (2003) The stigma of mental illness:
Effects of labelling on public attitudes towards people with mental disorder.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 108(4), 304–309.

Assefa D, et al. (2012) Internalized stigma among patients with schizophrenia in
Ethiopia: A cross-sectional facility-based study. BMC Psychiatry 12(1), 1–10.
Belete A, et al. (2023) The magnitude of common mental illness and associated
factors among adult holy water users in Amhara regional state orthodox
Tewahido churches, Ethiopia, 2021. BMC Psychiatry 23(1), 53.

Black DW and Grant JE (2014) DSM-5® Guidebook: The Essential Companion
to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. USA: American
Psychiatric Pub.

Carrara BS and Ventura CAA (2018) Self-stigma, mentally ill persons and
health services: An integrative review of literature. Archives of Psychiatric
Nursing 32(2), 317–324.

Clay J, et al. (2020) Core components of mental health stigma reduction
interventions in low-and middle-income countries: A systematic review.
Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences 29, e164.

Corrigan P (2004) How stigma interferes with mental health care. American

Psychologist 59(7), 614.

Corrigan PW (2016) Lessons learned from unintended consequences about

erasing the stigma of mental illness. World Psychiatry 15(1), 67–73.

Fox AB, et al. (2018) How and when does mental illness stigma impact
treatment seeking? Longitudinal examination of relationships between
anticipated and internalized stigma, symptom severity, and mental health
service use. Psychiatry Research 268, 15–20.

Girma E, et al. (2022) Mental health stigma and discrimination in Ethiopia:
Evidence synthesis to inform stigma reduction interventions. International
Journal of Mental Health Systems 16(1), 1–18.

Gronholm PC, et al. (2017) Interventions to reduce discrimination and stigma:
The state of the art. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 52,
249–258.

Gronholm PC, et al. (2023) Toward a multi-level strategy to reduce stigma in
global mental health: Overview protocol of the Indigo partnership to develop
and test interventions in low-and middle-income countries. International
Journal of Mental Health Systems 17(1), 1–11.

Grover S, Shouan A and Sahoo S (2020) Labels used for persons with severe
mental illness and their stigma experience in North India. Asian Journal of
Psychiatry 48, 101909.

Habtamu K, Alem A and Hanlon C (2015) Conceptualizing and contextual-
izing functioning in people with severe mental disorders in rural Ethiopia: A
qualitative study. BMC Psychiatry 15(1), 1–13.

Habtamu K, et al. (2018) Functional impairment among people with severe and
enduring mental disorder in rural Ethiopia: A cross-sectional study. Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 53, 803–814.

Hanlon C (2017) Next steps for meeting the needs of people with severe mental
illness in low-and middle-income countries. Epidemiology and Psychiatric
Sciences 26(4), 348–354.

Hannig A (2013) The pure and the pious: Corporeality, flow, and transgression in
Ethiopian orthodox Christianity. Journal of Religion in Africa 43(3), 297–328.
Jacobsson L and Merdasa F (1991) Traditional perceptions and treatment of
mental disorders in western Ethiopia before the 1974 revolution. Acta
Psychiatrica Scandinavica 84(5), 475–481.

Kapungwe A, et al. (2010) Mental illness-stigma and discrimination in Zambia.

African Journal of Psychiatry 13(3), 192–203.

Kasa GA and Kaba M (2023) Preferences for health care and its determinants
among mentally ill patients of the West Shoa zone community, Oromia,
Ethiopia. Patient Preference and Adherence 17, 557–570.

Kimotho SG (2018) Understanding the nature of stigma communication
associated with mental illness in Africa: A focus on cultural beliefs and
stereotypes. In Deconstructing Stigma in Mental Health. Cunnigham: IGI
Global, pp. 20–41.

Kleinman A (1980) Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture: An Explor-
ation of the Borderland between Anthropology, Medicine, and Psychiatry.
USA: University of California Press.

Klik KA, et al. (2019) Toward understanding mental illness stigma and help-
seeking: A social identity perspective. Social Science & Medicine 222, 35–43.
Makhmud A, et al. (2022) Indirect social contact interventions to reduce mental
health-related stigma in low-and middle-income countries: Systematic
review. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences 31, e79.

Mihretu A (2019) The role of religion for mental health and psychological
wellbeing: Implications for Ethiopian context. Abyssinia Journal of Business
and Social Sciences 4(2), 8–13.

Monteiro NM and Balogun SK (2014) Perceptions of mental illness in Ethiopia:
A profile of attitudes, beliefs and practices among community members,
healthcare workers and traditional healers. International Journal of Culture
and Mental Health 7(3), 259–272.

Pescosolido BA and Martin JK (2015) The stigma complex. Annual Review of

Sociology 41, 87–116.

Pugh T, et al. (2015) Structural stigma and mental illness. In Commissioned
Paper for Committee on the Science of Changing Behavioral Health Social
Norms. USA: Mailman School of Public, Columbia University.

Rössler W (2016) The stigma of mental disorders: A millennia-long history of

social exclusion and prejudices. EMBO Reports 17(9), 1250–1253.

Shahwan S, et al. (2022) Strategies to reduce mental illness stigma: Perspectives
of people with lived experience and caregivers. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health 19(3), 1632.

Shrivastava A, Johnston M and Bureau Y (2012) Stigma of mental illness-1:

Clinical reflections. Mens Sana Monographs 10(1), 70.

Subu MA, et al. (2021) Types of stigma experienced by patients with mental
illness and mental health nurses in Indonesia: A qualitative content analysis.
International Journal of Mental Health Systems 15, 1–12.

Thornicroft G, et al. (2007) Stigma: Ignorance, prejudice or discrimination?

British Journal of Psychiatry 190(3), 192–193.

Thornicroft G, et al. (2016) Evidence for effective interventions to reduce
mental-health-related stigma and discrimination. The Lancet 387(10023),
1123–1132.

Thornicroft G, et al. (2022) The Lancet commission on ending stigma and

discrimination in mental health. The Lancet 400(10361), 1438–1480.

Tirfessa K, et al. (2020) Impact of integrated mental health care on food
insecurity of households of people with severe mental illness in a rural
African district: A community-based, controlled before–after study. Tropical
Medicine & International Health 25(4), 414–423.

Waqas A, et al. (2020) Interventions to reduce stigma related to mental illnesses
in educational institutes: A systematic review. Psychiatric Quarterly 91,
887–903.

Yang LH, et al. (2014a) “What matters most:” A cultural mechanism moder-
ating structural vulnerability and moral experience of mental illness stigma.
Social Science & Medicine 103, 84–93.

Yang LH, et al. (2014b) Recent advances in cross-cultural measurement in
psychiatric epidemiology: Utilizing ‘what matters most’ to identify culture-
specific aspects of stigma. International Journal of Epidemiology 43(2),
494–510.

Yeshanew B, et al. (2020) Help-seeking intention and associated factors towards
mental illness among residents of Mertule Mariam town, East Gojam zone,
Amhara region, Ethiopia: A mixed-method study. Annals of General
Psychiatry 19, 1–11.

Zeleke WA, et al. (2019) Mental health in Ethiopia: An exploratory study of
counseling alignment with culture. International Journal for the Advance-
ment of Counselling 41, 214–229.
