# González-Valero_2019_Use of Meditation and Cognitive Behavioral Therapies for the Treatment of Stress, Depression and Anxiety in Students. A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Review
Use of Meditation and Cognitive Behavioral
Therapies for the Treatment of Stress, Depression
and Anxiety in Students. A Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis

Gabriel González-Valero , Félix Zurita-Ortega , José Luis Ubago-Jiménez
Pilar Puertas-Molero *

and

Department of Didactics of Musical, Artistic and Corporal Expression, University of Granada, 18071 Granada,
Spain; ggvalero@ugr.es (G.G.-V.); felixzo@ugr.es (F.Z.-O.); jlubago@ugr.es (J.L.U.-J.)
* Correspondence: pilarpuertas@correo.ugr.es; Tel.: +34-958-248-949

Received: 6 October 2019; Accepted: 8 November 2019; Published: 10 November 2019

Abstract: The prevalence of mental health problems within students due to high academic demands
and learning diﬃculties is a current challenge the ﬁeld of education. The aim of this study is to review
the scientiﬁc literature in order to analyze the eﬀect produced by cognitive-behavioral programs
and meditation strategies on stress, anxiety, and depression in students. A further aim is to identify
the determinants of treatment success. The bibliographic search was carried out using Web of
Science, speciﬁcally in the categories of “Education and Educational Research” and “Psychology”,
obtaining a sample of 122 articles published between 2007 and 2018. Studies were included which
had a pre-experimental or quasi-experimental design and included pre-test and post-test phases.
Following application of inclusion criteria, 34 articles were selected for inclusion in a meta-analysis of
the random eﬀects of each variable. This obtained an average eﬀect size of −0.41 for stress, −0.37
for anxiety, and −0.30 for depression. Three moderating variables were analyzed, with signiﬁcant
correlations being found for the type of treatment relating to stress (Q = 11.01, df = 2, p = 0.004,
R2 = 0.294) and depression (Q = 6.14, df = 2, p = 0.048; R2 = 0.436). The stage of education of the
individuals was also found to impact upon anxiety intervention success (Q = 13.093 df = 2, p = 0.0009,
R2 = 0.196). Interventions mainly addressed the importance of meditation strategies, mindfulness
programs, and cognitive-behavioral therapy to reduce stress, anxiety, and depression in students.
This supports the need to increase research at an early age, considering the treatment of mental health
as a key factor inﬂuencing academic performance and quality of life.

Keywords: stress; anxiety; depression; students; meta-analysis

1. Introduction

Research in the ﬁeld of the mind is increasing, with students becoming key objects of study
in the ﬁeld of social sciences and health [1,2]. As students progress through the educational stages
they become more prone to suﬀering from depression and stress [3], largely due to their greater
responsibilities, academic demands, and the diﬃculties they face when developing their learning
and other skills. This has an impact on their psychological well-being and can lead to socio-cultural
imbalance and deterioration of their mental health [4]. In this sense, Álvarez, Aguilar, and Lorenzo
(2012) [5] emphasize factors such as the pace of study, exams, teaching requirements, socio-cultural
pressure, competitiveness amongst classmates, and changes to the diet and sleep cycle as severe
determinants of mental health problems in students [6].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394; doi:10.3390/ijerph16224394

www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

International Journal ofEnvironmental Researchand Public Health(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

2 of 23

Stress is considered as a psycho-physiological reaction that occurs in response to felt demands [7].
When dealing with this concept in the educational ﬁeld, it refers to an overload of tension that is
generated by stressful situations or pressure and causes a mental disorder. According to North
and Pfeﬀerbaum (2013) [3] negative stress is a generator of attrition, increasing the vulnerability of
individuals in childhood and adolescence to suﬀering anxiety disorders or depressive symptoms.
On the other hand, positive stress allows students to face everyday events and is essential for life [8].
Symptoms of stress in childhood and adolescence are conditioned by stressful indicators such as
lack of aﬀection, negative family situation, school problems, poor interpersonal skills, and negative
physical-body perceptions [9].
In response to stressful factors, if not worked on at an early age,
individuals will experience negative emotions in adulthood and on the job, which leads to moral
disengagement and psychosocial problems [10].

Another psychosocial factor that alters the mental health of students is anxiety. This is manifested
as an exaggerated fear response towards events that are not always identiﬁable or may be caused by
inappropriate situations [11]. This disorder begins during childhood when individuals lack cognitive
maturity [2]. The ability to mentally anticipate develops as one progresses through the stages of
education. This produces cognitive mistrust that is manifested as unpleasant feelings and physiological
changes [12]. Triggers of students’ anxious responses are related to biological and cognitive triggers,
the breathing response, the learning process, and academic stress [13]. As a result, anxiety disorders
have increased by 14.90% in the general population since 2005 [7,14].

Taking this conceptual approach, depression in students has gone from being an ignored concept,
to constituting an entity of educational psychopathology [15], largely because there was an increase of
18.40% cases between 2005 and 2015 [14]. The existence of this factor in early stages is still a matter
of debate but it is included amongst the aﬀective educational disorders. Thus, it is understood as a
vital psychophysical disorder that includes psychopathological features and corporal alterations [16].
In the educational ﬁeld, depression leads to a decrease in mood and emotional response to daily
activities during which aggressive behaviors are presented and the consumption of harmful substances
emerges [17]. Additionally, the depressive condition is characterized by the contemplation of life as a
failure and without meaning, and experiences of irritability, tension, and a lack of energy and a sense
of reality [18].

Educational psychology has shown interest in diﬀerent techniques for the treatment of these
psychosocial disorders [19,20]. Intervention strategies based on awareness and the promotion of
psychological well-being in the educational context have shown a great impact. This is because they
focus on experiences of the present moment without judgment, in order to accept without reacting
to what appears in the mental ﬁeld [21–23]. Concentrative meditation or Samatha is one technique
that has been used. For this, an internal or external object is used as the center of attention, with
concentration being moved away from and then returned to the object [24]. Yoga is a strategy that seeks
to expand the ﬁeld of human existence through postures, allowing one to achieve a ﬁrm body, a stable
mind, and a benevolent spirit [25]. In order to re-establish cognitive processes, tai chi combines slow
physical movements with meditation, body and soul awareness, images, and breathing control [26].
According to that presented above, the present meta-analytical research addresses questions about
the treatment of stress, anxiety, and depression in students, through meditation or cognitive behavioral
programs in order to observe the impact on mental health problems:

• How many interventions have been conducted with students from 2007 to 2018? What kind of

meditation programs and/or cognitive-behavioral therapy has been used?

• What eﬀect do diﬀerent interventions have on the treatment of stress, anxiety, and depression?
• What treatment factors inﬂuence students’ stress, anxiety, and depression?

These questions form the basis of the research hypothesis. This assumes that the treatment of
stress, anxiety, and depression in students with meditation and/or cognitive-behavioral programs
has a positive eﬀect by reducing levels of these mental health problems. Additionally, the number

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

3 of 23

of investigations including this type of treatment is increasing. The length, type of intervention, and
educational stage of the individual will be key factors impacting the signiﬁcance of the eﬀect produced.
Therefore, the purpose of this meta-analysis is to carry out a systematic review of scientiﬁc
literature in order to analyze the eﬀect of diﬀerent meditation treatments and/or cognitive-behavioral
programs on stress, anxiety, and depression in students at diﬀerent stages of education (Primary
Education, Secondary Education, and University). Thereby, the main objectives are established:
(1) analyze the scientiﬁc literature of studies including an experimentation based on meditation
programs and/or cognitive-behavioral therapies for the treatment of stress, anxiety, and depression in
students; (2) calculate the eﬀect of interventions on the variables of stress, anxiety, and depression within
the experimental group; (3) identify the determining factors inﬂuencing the eﬃcacy of meditation
and/or cognitive-behavioral treatments.

2. Materials and Methods

In order to structure the report and ensure integrity of conclusions the PRISMA statement for

systematic reviews that incorporate meta-analysis was used [27,28].

2.1. Search Strategy

The bibliography search was carried out during December 2018 using Web of Science (WOS) as the
main database. In addition, support repositories such as SCOPUS, Psychology and Behavioral Sciences
Collection, and PubMed were used. Following initial selection of articles, reference lists were analyzed
to identify further articles that related to stress, anxiety, and depression in students, and included
implementation programs at diﬀerent educational stages. The key individual search terms used were
“Stress”, “Anxiety”, “Depression”, “Implementation Program”, and “Students”. Boolean operators
such as “and” and “or” were also used. The time range was limited to include only articles published
in the last decade (2007–2018). References published in English and Spanish were considered obtaining
a total of 188 publications. The search was reﬁned to articles published in the categories of “Education
Educational Research” and “Psychology”, providing a total of 122 results.

In determining the study population, the research sample was selected based on the following
inclusion criteria: (1) scientiﬁc articles reporting a program of meditation and/or cognitive-behavioral
therapy in students for the treatment of stress, anxiety, and depression within the educational ﬁeld;
(2) studies that use a pre-experimental or quasi-experimental methodological design with pre-test and
post-test; (3) investigations reporting statistical results which enable calculation of the eﬀect size of
the program implemented; (4) articles published in journals with a peer review process from 2007
to July 2018. To enable studies with a pre-experimental design (those that do not include a control
group) to be considered, the eﬀect size was calculated using results of the diﬀerences between the
means reported in the post-test phase (acts as an experimental group) and the pre-test phase (acts as a
control group). In order to comply with the ﬁrst criterion, a ﬁrst reading of the title and summary was
made. Afterwards, a systematic reading of the full text of articles was carried out in order to examine it
was in accordance with the remaining inclusion criteria. Articles that did not present statistical data
(qualitative studies) were excluded as they do not allow statistical analysis. In this way, after applying
these conceptual, methodological, and statistical criteria, 88 studies were excluded.

2.2. Population and Literary Sample

Based on the search strategy, the study population corresponds to 188 scientiﬁc articles found
in the WOS database. After considering and applying the inclusion criteria, the ﬁnal meta-analysis
sample included 34 scientiﬁc articles (Figure 1).

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

4 of 23

Figure 1. Flow diagram of the selection of articles.

2.3. Coding of Articles

The 34 articles that constitute the meta-analysis included 3296 participating students. A total of 22
eﬀect sizes had been calculated for stress treatment, 28 eﬀect sizes for anxiety, and 28 eﬀect sizes for
depression. To extract data from the articles, a coding process was followed: (1) author/authors and
year of publication; (2) country of intervention (3) educational stage and range or average age of the
study subjects; (4) nature of control and experimental group; (5) methodological approach; (6) type of
intervention strategy; (7) evaluation instrument; (8) size eﬀect using Cohen’s index d; (9) CI to 95%.
The investigations included in the meta-analysis were coded by each of the authors, in order to
check the reliability of coding and the degree of agreement between researchers relating to the selection,
extraction of data, and calculation of eﬀect sizes. Degree of agreement in the rating of articles was 90%.
This was obtained by dividing the number of coincidences by the total number of categories deﬁned
for each study and multiplying it by 100. Selection and codiﬁcation were carried out independently by
all of the study authors, while the calculation of the eﬀect sizes was carried out by two of the authors.
In cases of disagreement, agreed solutions were adopted among the coders.

To establish methodological quality of the study, reliability of selection and detection for more
than two of the evaluators was determined using the Kappa de Fleiss statistical measure (Kf) [29],
whilst the Cohen’s Kappa statistical index (Kc) was used to examine the coding of two authors [30].
A value of Kf = 0.775 was obtained for the selection and extraction of data, which indicates that there is
substantial agreement (0.61–0.80). Values of Kc = 0.830 for the calculation of eﬀect sizes, show almost
perfect agreement (0.81–1.00) [31].

2.4. Eﬀect Size Index

Eﬀect sizes were calculated from the diﬀerences of standardized means expressed in units of
standard deviation, using the standardized measure Cohen’s d (1988) [32] and the correlation index r,
in order to establish post-test diﬀerences between groups receiving treatment and control. We then
transformed r values into d values. This was done by applying the correction oﬀered by Hedges,
Shymansky, and Woodworth (1989) [33] which considers diﬀerent sample sizes. In addition, variance
and the 95% conﬁdence interval (IC) were established for each eﬀect size. Based on the objective of the
research, it is important to clarify that negative eﬀect sizes indicate a reduction in students’ mental
health problems, whilst positive values indicate that mental health has worsened.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, x 4 of 24   Figure 1. Flow diagram of the selection of articles. 2.3. Coding of Articles The 34 articles that constitute the meta-analysis included 3296 participating students. A total of 22 effect sizes had been calculated for stress treatment, 28 effect sizes for anxiety, and 28 effect sizes for depression. To extract data from the articles, a coding process was followed: (1) author/authors and year of publication; (2) country of intervention (3) educational stage and range or average age of the study subjects; (4) nature of control and experimental group; (5) methodological approach; (6) type of intervention strategy; (7) evaluation instrument; (8) size effect using Cohen’s index d; (9) CI to 95%. The investigations included in the meta-analysis were coded by each of the authors, in order to check the reliability of coding and the degree of agreement between researchers relating to the selection, extraction of data, and calculation of effect sizes. Degree of agreement in the rating of articles was 90%. This was obtained by dividing the number of coincidences by the total number of categories defined for each study and multiplying it by 100. Selection and codification were carried out independently by all of the study authors, while the calculation of the effect sizes was carried out by two of the authors. In cases of disagreement, agreed solutions were adopted among the coders. To establish methodological quality of the study, reliability of selection and detection for more than two of the evaluators was determined using the Kappa de Fleiss statistical measure (Kf) [29], whilst the Cohen’s Kappa statistical index (Kc) was used to examine the coding of two authors [30]. A value of Kf = 0.775 was obtained for the selection and extraction of data, which indicates that there is substantial agreement (0.61–0.80). Values of Kc = 0.830 for the calculation of effect sizes, show almost perfect agreement (0.81–1.00) [31]. 2.4. Effect Size Index Effect sizes were calculated from the differences of standardized means expressed in units of standard deviation, using the standardized measure Cohen’s d (1988) [32] and the correlation index r, in order to establish post-test differences between groups receiving treatment and control. We then transformed r values into d values. This was done by applying the correction offered by Hedges, Shymansky, and Woodworth (1989) [33] which considers different sample sizes. In addition, variance and the 95% confidence interval (IC) were established for each effect size. Based on the objective of the research, it is important to clarify that negative effect sizes indicate a reduction in students’ mental health problems, whilst positive values indicate that mental health has worsened. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

5 of 23

2.5. Analysis of Meta-Analysis Data

®

All statistical analyses were carried out using IBM SPSS

software version 22.0 (IBM Corp,
Armonk, NY, USA) and Review Manager 5.3 (Crochrane, London, United Kingdom). Due to the
diﬀerent types of interventions, a random eﬀects meta-analysis model was used which considered
intra-study and inter-study variability. Heterogeneity of eﬀect sizes was calculated using the I2
index, which evaluates the degree of heterogeneity of individual results. To verify whether or not
heterogeneity exists between eﬀect sizes, the Q statistic was calculated. In order to specify examination
of a comparison of hypotheses testing the nullity of eﬀects, the Z-bias test was applied. Besides, eﬀect
sizes were evaluated through visual inspection of a forest plot. Further, ANOVAs were carried out with
the intention of deducing the inﬂuence of moderating variables (duration of treatment, educational
stage, and intervention strategy).

In order to examine the likely inﬂuence of publication bias on the meta-analysis the security
number (Ns) was calculated [34]. This compares the study sample, eﬀect size of recovered studies,
and the mean eﬀect of studies lost (a value of 0.05 is used). In addition, the number of lost studies is
estimated [35] with the assumption of ﬁve lost studies for each one published is used, plus a minimum
of 10. When the Ns is greater than the number of lost studies, it can be stated that the rigor of the
meta-analysis is not threatened by publication bias, however, if the number of lost studies is higher
than the Ns, a threat is evident.

2.6. Evaluation of the Methodological Quality of the Primary Studies

In order to evaluate the methodological quality of the primary studies, two aspects collected by
Botella-Ausina and Sánchez-Meca (2015) [36] must be addressed: (1) quality of the study based on
the fact that eﬀect estimates are free of publication bias. A poor evaluation may threaten internal and
external validity; (2) quality of the report for which the PRISMA checklist was used [28]. This ensures
that the meta-analysis contains relevant data and information enabling its replication.

The 27 items of the PRISMA checklist relate to various aspects of the study [28]. They relate to the
title (item 1), abstract (item 2), introduction (items 3 and 4), method (items 5–16), results (items 17–23),
discussion (items 24–26), and ﬁnancial aspects (item 27). The present meta-analysis appropriately
addressed the elements that should be included in a report as it meets all of the criteria except item 19
(results on the risk of bias in each study) and item 27 (ﬁnancing of the meta-analysis).

3. Results

3.1. Evolution of Scientiﬁc Production

During the period of 2007–2017, 122 articles were published in WOS which referred to the treatment
of stress, anxiety, and depression in students. Figure 2 of the evolution of scientiﬁc production shows
that other research databases provided 27.86% (n = 34) of the total scientiﬁc production analyzed.
There was an upward trend in the publication of articles in WOS over the course of the decade until a
maximum was reached in 2015 (n = 21), followed by a slight dip in 2016 (n = 17). The meta-analysis
includes at least one study for each year of this period, with 2015 and 2016 being the years that provide
the most articles, with n = 6 and n = 10 respectively.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

6 of 23

Figure 2. Evolution of scientiﬁc production uncovered by WOS and other research databases.

3.2. Results Generated by Study Interventions Targeting Stress

3.2.1. Study Results According to the Stress Treatment

Table 1 presents results for the treatment of stress in which a total of 1871 students participated in 20
registered studies. A total of 22 effect sizes were calculated with one of the studies carrying out three
treatments. The recorded data were statistically significant (p < 0.00001) and the weighted mean effect
size produced in the experimental groups was X = −0.41 (95%CI = −0.52, −0.28). This shows an average
effect according to criteria established by Cohen (1988) [32]. The educational stage in which more stress
treatments were carried out was university (n = 15), followed by Secondary Education (n = 5).

A forest plot is shown (Figure 3) in order to interpret the heterogeneity of eﬀect sizes. The Q
statistic = 84.53 (p < 0.00001) indicates that the results obtained are heterogeneous with respect to
the calculated eﬀects size. The I2 statistic = 75% suggests high heterogeneity. To examine whether
the combined results of the meta-analysis are signiﬁcant, we used the statistic Z = 5.17 (p < 0.00001).
This indicates that the combined evidence points to a non-null (signiﬁcant) eﬀect.

Figure 3. Forest plot for the treatment of stress in students.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, x 6 of 24   Figure 2. Evolution of scientific production uncovered by WOS and other research databases. 3.2. Results Generated by Study Interventions Targeting Stress 3.2.1. Study Results According to the Stress Treatment Table 1 presents results for the treatment of stress in which a total of 1871 students participated in 20 registered studies. A total of 22 effect sizes were calculated with one of the studies carrying out three treatments. The recorded data were statistically significant (p < 0.00001) and the weighted mean effect size produced in the experimental groups was  = –0.41 (95%CI = –0.52, –0.28). This shows an average effect according to criteria established by Cohen (1988) [32]. The educational stage in which more stress treatments were carried out was university (n = 15), followed by Secondary Education (n = 5). 01234567891011121314151617181920212220072008200920102011201220122014201520162017WOSSTUDY ARTICLESInt. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, x 9 of 24  A forest plot is shown (Figure 3) in order to interpret the heterogeneity of effect sizes. The Q statistic = 84.53 (p < 0.00001) indicates that the results obtained are heterogeneous with respect to the calculated effects size. The I2 statistic = 75% suggests high heterogeneity. To examine whether the combined results of the meta-analysis are significant, we used the statistic Z = 5.17 (p < 0.00001). This indicates that the combined evidence points to a non-null (significant) effect.  Figure 3. Forest plot for the treatment of stress in students. 3.2.2. Moderation Analysis Following identification that real effects are not common amongst all included studies and recognition that the effect sizes obtained are not homogeneous, an analysis of moderating variables was carried out to identify variability. Treatment length, educational stage, and treatment strategy were treated as moderating aspects. Table 2 shows the groupings for each moderator, average effect size, 95% CI, and significance level.  With regards to treatment duration, short-term interventions show smaller effect sizes ( = –0.33, CI = [–0.68, 0.01]) than those produced for interventions lasting more than 9 weeks ( = –0.34; CI = [–0.52, –0.15]). Treatments that reported a medium duration present a medium-moderate effect size ( = –0.46, CI = [–0.62, –0.30]). With respect to educational stage, results relating to students undertaking Secondary Education obtained higher average effect sizes ( = –0.46, CI = [–0.62, –0.29]) than those reported by university students ( = –0.38; CI = [–0.53, –0.23]). In consideration of the treatment strategy used, notable differences between categories are noted. Programs based on mindfulness techniques have higher average effect size ( = –0.53, CI = [–0.64, –0.42]), compared to programs incorporating body therapies ( = –0.19; CI = [–0.45, 0.07]) and cognitive-behavioral programs ( = –0.12; CI = [–0.40, 0.16]). Table 2. Analysis of stress moderators. Study Groups K * M * CI to 95% p * According treatment duration Short duration (0–4 weeks) 5 –0.33  [–0.68, 0.01] 0.26 Medium duration (from 5 to 8 weeks) 10 –0.46  [–0.62, –0.30] Long duration (more than 9 weeks) 5 –0.34  [–0.52, –0.15] Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

7 of 23

Table 1. Investigations targeting the stress variable.

Author/s (Year)

Country

Educational Stage
(Range or Average
Age) *1

Sample
(EG-CG) *2

Study Type

Aboalshamat, Hou, and Strodl
(2015) [37]

Saudi Arabia

Bennett and Dorjee (2016) [19]

Wales

Berger, Gelkopf, and Heineberg
(2012) [38]

Bluth, Gaylord, Campo,
Mullarkey, and Hobbs (2016) [39]

Breso, Schaufeli, Salanova (2011)
[40]

Burckhardt, Manicavasagar,
Batterham, Hadzi-Pavlovic
(2016) [41]

Delgado, Ciria, Blanca, Mata,
Vera, and Vila (2015) [42]

Gallego, Aguilar, Cangas,
Rosado, and Langer (2016) [43]

Israel

USA

Spain

Australia

Spain

Spain

Holm, Tyssen, Stordal, and
Haver (2010) [44]

Norway

Kang, Choi, and Ryu (2009) [45]

South Korea

Lynch, Gander, Kohls, Kudielka,
and Walach (2011) [46]

Phang, Mukhtar, Ibrahim, Keng,
and Sidik (2015) [47]

Phang, Chiang, Ng, Keng, and
Oei (2016) [48]

England

Malaysia

Malaysia

Raes et al. (2014) [18]

Belgium

UE
(20–22)

SE
(16–18)

SE
(12.8 ± 1.0)

SE
(14–17)

UE
(18–26)

SE
(15–18)

UE
(21.5 ± 3.94)

130
(65-65)

24
(11-13)

154
(107-47)

34
(16-18)

71
(21-50)

46
(24-22)

41
(27-14)

Quasi-experimental
(6 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(16 sessions)

Quasi-experimental
(6 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(4 sessions)

Quasi-experimental
(12 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(3 weeks)

UE
(18–49)

282
(237-45)

Quasi-experimental
(16 sessions)

Intervention
Strategy *3

Self-development
programme
(HBUSS)

Instrument *4

Eﬀect Size (d)

95% CI

DASS-21

−0.066

[−0.410, 0.277]

MBSR

DASS-21

−0.402

[−1.213, 0.408]

EES

MFY

CBT

Strong Minds
Condition
(mindfulness)

DSM IV

−0.480

[−0.830, −0.142]

PSS

−0.823

[−1.524, −0.122]

MBI-SS

−0.330

[−0.842, 0.182]

DASS-21

−0.290

[−0.872, 0.291]

MBSR

PSS

−0.745

[−1.410, −0.08]

Mindfulness
(MBCT)
Yoga
Tai Chi

DASS-21

−0.561
−0.094
−0.301

[−0.929, −0.192]
[−0.456, 0.266]
[−0.680, 0.076]

UE
(23.6 ± 3.4)

UE
(22.47 ± 1.17)

UE
(19–46)

UE
(21.04 ± 1.13)

UE
(21–25)

SE
(13–20)

140
(47-93)

32
(16-16)

16
(10-6)

75
(37-38)

104

Quasi-experimental
(12 sessions/12
weeks)

Self-development
and discussion
groups

PMSS

−0.061

[−0.412, 0.288]

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

Quasi-experimental
(5 weeks)

Pre-experimental
(4 weeks)

MBSR

PWI-SF

−0.642

[−1.353, 0.068]

MBCUL
(MBCT/MBSR)

MBSM
(MBCT/MBSR)

Mindful-Gym
(MBCT/MBSR)

PSS

PSS

PSS

−0.448

[−1.472, 0.575]

−0.669

[−1.135, −0.204]

−0.567

[−0.844, −0.290]

357
(182-175)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

MBCT

DASS-21

−0.443

[−0.653, −0.233]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

8 of 23

Table 1. Cont.

Author/s (Year)

Country

Shian-Ling, Cheng-Kar, and Tian
Po (2015) [49]

Malaysia

Song and Lindquist (2015) [20]

South Korea

Spadaro and Hunker (2016) [50]

USA

Steinhardt and Dolbier
(2008) [51]

USA

Taylor et al. (2014) [23]

England

Van Gordon, Shonin, Sumich,
Sundin, and Griﬃths (2014) [52]

England

Educational Stage
(Range or Average
Age) *1

UE
(21–24)

UE
(19.6 ± 1.7)

UE
(18–25)

UE
(18–53)

UE
(28.61 ± 9.12)

UE
(20–42)

Sample
(EG-CG) *2

Study Type

Intervention
Strategy *3

Instrument *4

Eﬀect Size (d)

95% CI

134
(77-57)

44
(21-23)

26

57
(30-27)

79
(40-39)

25
(14-11)

Quasi-experimental
(4 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(10 weeks)

Pre-experimental
(8 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(4 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

Mindful-Gym

PSS

−0.174

[−0.517, 0.168]

MBSR

MBSR

Transforming Lives
Resilience
Education

DASS-21

−0.866

[−1.484, −0.247]

PSS

−0.352

[−0.9, 0.195]

CD–RISC

0.467

[−0.06, 0.993]

MBCT-SH

DASS-21

−0.576

[−1.026, −0.126]

MAT

DASS-21

−1.297

[−2.165, −0.429]

Note. * 1 Secondary Education (SE); University Education (UE). * 2 Control group (CG); Experimental group (EG). * 3 “How to Be an Ultra Super Student” (HBUSS); Mindfulness Based
Stress Reduction (MBSR); ERASE-Stress extension (EES); Making Friends With Yourself: A Mindful Self-compassion Program for Teens (MFY); Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT);
Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT); Mindfulness-based Coping with University Life (MBCUL); Mindfulness-based stress management (MBSM) ** MBCT self-help (MBCT-SH);
Meditation Awareness Training (MAT). * 4 Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scales, 21 item version (DASS-21): Perceived Stress Scale (PSS); Scale of Academic Burnout Syndrome (MBI-SS);
Perceived Medical School Stress (PMSS); The psychosocial wellbeing index-short form (PWI-SF); Connor–Davidson Resilience Scale (CD–RISC) ** Perceived Stress Questionnaire (PSQ).

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

9 of 23

3.2.2. Moderation Analysis

Following identiﬁcation that real eﬀects are not common amongst all included studies and
recognition that the eﬀect sizes obtained are not homogeneous, an analysis of moderating variables
was carried out to identify variability. Treatment length, educational stage, and treatment strategy
were treated as moderating aspects. Table 2 shows the groupings for each moderator, average eﬀect
size, 95% CI, and signiﬁcance level.

With regards to treatment duration, short-term interventions show smaller eﬀect sizes (X = −0.33,
CI = [−0.68, 0.01]) than those produced for interventions lasting more than 9 weeks (X = −0.34; CI =
[−0.52, −0.15]). Treatments that reported a medium duration present a medium-moderate eﬀect size (X
= −0.46, CI = [−0.62, −0.30]). With respect to educational stage, results relating to students undertaking
Secondary Education obtained higher average eﬀect sizes (X = −0.46, CI = [−0.62, −0.29]) than those
reported by university students (X = −0.38; CI = [−0.53, −0.23]). In consideration of the treatment
strategy used, notable diﬀerences between categories are noted. Programs based on mindfulness
techniques have higher average eﬀect size (X = −0.53, CI = [−0.64, −0.42]), compared to programs
incorporating body therapies (X = −0.19; CI = [−0.45, 0.07]) and cognitive-behavioral programs (X =
−0.12; CI = [−0.40, 0.16]).

Table 2. Analysis of stress moderators.

Study Groups

K *

M *

CI to 95%

p *

Short duration (0–4 weeks)
Medium duration (from 5 to 8 weeks)
Long duration (more than 9 weeks)

According treatment duration
−0.33
−0.46
−0.34

5
10
5

[−0.68, 0.01]
[−0.62, −0.30]
[−0.52, −0.15]

According the educational stage of students receiving treatment
[−0.62, −0.29]
[−0.53, −0.23]

−0.46
−0.38

5
15

Secondary Education
University

0.26

0.52

According to intervention strategy

Cognitive-behavioral programs
Programs based on mindfulness
Body therapy programs (Yoga-Tai Chi)

5
15
2

−0.12
−0.53
−0.19

[−0.40, 0.16]
[−0.64, −0.42]
[−0.45, 0.07]

0.004 *

Note: * Number of interventions (K); average eﬀect size (M); Statistically signiﬁcant (p).

Correlations between the calculated eﬀect sizes and the moderating variables were examined
using ANOVAs. The results obtained show that there is a signiﬁcant eﬀect of treatment strategy with
interventions based on mindfulness being associated with greater success (Q = 11.01, df = 2, p = 0.004,
R2 = 0.294). In contrast, the duration of treatment is not associated with TE (Q = 2.66, df = 2, p > 0.05),
with educational stage similarly not producing associations (Q = 0.42, df = 1, p > 0.05).

3.2.3. Control of Publication Bias.

In the case of stress, a value of Ns = 144 was obtained. This assumes that 144 lost studies with a
null eﬀect size are needed, so that when this ﬁgure is combined with the studies selected in the present
study a combined estimate equal to 0.05 is obtained. The number of lost studies estimated for stress
was 110. Thus, we can conclude that the result obtained in the meta-analysis is not threatened by
publication bias, since the number of lost studies is less than Ns.

3.3. Results Generated by the Interventions of the Study of Anxiety

3.3.1. Study Results Relating to Anxiety Treatment

In the 26 studies that targeted anxiety, 2602 students were included (Table 3) and 28 eﬀect sizes
were calculated. The weighted mean eﬀect size of treatment groups was X = −0.37 and 95% CI = [−0.50,

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

10 of 23

−0.23], which corresponds to a medium-low eﬀect (Cohen, 1988) [32]. Even so, p < 0.00001 shows
that the data are statistically signiﬁcant. The majority of students addressing anxiety took place at
university (n = 17), with seven studies taking place in Secondary Education and two occurring during
Primary Education.

The Q statistic = 148.42 (p < 0.00001) shows that the results obtained are heterogeneous with
respect to the eﬀect sizes calculated in the research. The statistical I2 index = 82% indicates that 82% of
variance can be attributed to the heterogeneity of results. This conﬁrms high heterogeneity. The Z
bias statistic = 5.66 (p < 0.00001) shows that the combined results of the meta-analysis are signiﬁcant.
Figure 4 presents a forest plot with the intention of being able to visually interpret the heterogeneity of
eﬀect sizes.

Figure 4. Forest plot of anxiety interventions in students.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, x 13 of 24   Figure 4. Forest plot of anxiety interventions in students. 3.3.2. Moderation Analysis In the case of stress, calculated effect sizes are not homogeneous and it is accepted that the real effects are not common in most studies. As a result, an analysis of moderating variables was performed (Table 4).  With regards to treatment length, short-term interventions show near null effect sizes ( = –0.03, CI = [–0.45, 0.39]). Long-term interventions generally obtained small effect sizes with some achieving moderate effects ( = –0.36, CI = [–0.56, –0.17]). Finally, interventions lasting between 5 and 8 weeks produced between a medium effect size and a high effect size ( = –0.45; CI = [–0.64, –0.26]). In terms of educational stage, studies conducted in Primary Education obtained large effect sizes ( = –0.88, CI = [–1.15, –0.61]), while those carried out in Secondary Education produced small average effect sizes ( = –0.27, CI = [–0.54, –0.01]). Studies conducted with University students produced medium effects ( = –0.40, CI = [–0.55, –0.22]). In consideration of treatment strategy, cognitive-behavioral programs show a small effect size ( = –0.27, CI = [–0.61, 0.07]), whilst programs based on mindfulness ( = –0.40; CI = [–0.54, –0.24]) and body therapy ( = –0.52; CI = [–0.88, –0.15]) show a medium-moderate effect size. Table 4. Analysis of anxiety moderators. Study Groups K * M * 95% CI p* According to treatment length Short duration (0–4 weeks) 3 –0.03  [–0.45, 0.39] 0.20 Medium duration (from 5 to 8 weeks) 14 –0.45  [–0.64, –0.26] Long duration (more than 9 weeks) 9 –0.36  [–0.56, –0.17] According to the educational stage of students receiving treatment Primary Education 2 –0.88  [–1.15, –0.61] 0.0009 * Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

11 of 23

Table 3. List of studies addressing anxiety.

Author/s (Year)

Country

Educational Stage
(Range or Average
Age)*1

Sample
(EG-CG)*2

Study Type

Aboalshamat, Hou, and Strodl
(2015) [37]

Saudi Arabia

Ando (2011) [9]

Japan

Bennett and Dorjee (2016) [19]

Wales

Berger, Pat-Horenczyk, and
Gelkopf (2007) [38]

Bluth, Gaylord, Campo,
Mullarkey, and Hobbs (2016) [39]

Bradley, McCraty, Atkinson,
Tomasino, Daugherty, and
Arguelles (2010) [53]

Brennan, McGrady, Lynch,
Schaefer, Whearty (2016) [54]

Burckhardt, Manicavasagar,
Batterham, Hadzi-Pavlovic
(2016) [41]

Chen, Yang, Wang, and Zhang
(2013) [55]

Israel

USA

USA

USA

Australia

China

Dvorakova et al. (2017) [21]

USA

Gallego, Aguilar, Cangas,
Rosado, and Langer (2016) [43]

Spain

Johnson et al. (2016) [22]

Australia

Kang, Choi, and Ryu (2009) [45]

South Korea

Lynch, Gander, Kohls, Kudielka,
and Walach (2011) [46]

England

UE
(20–22)

UE
(19.1 ± 1.5)

SE
(16–18)

PE
(7–11)

SE
(14–17)

SE
(15.3 ± 0.45)

UE
(23.3 ± 2.3)

SE
(15–18)

UE
(19.5 ± 0.87)

UE
(18.2 ± 0.4)

UE
(18–49)

SE
(13.63 ± 0.43)

UE
(22.47 ± 1.17)

UE
(19–46)

130
(65-65)

191
(157-34)

24
(11-13)

142
(70-72)

34
(16-18)

48
(27-21)

42

46
(24-22)

60
(30-30)

109
(55-54)

258
(111-147)

32
(16-16)

16
(10-6)

Intervention
strategy*3

Self-development
program
(HBUSS)

Instrument*4

Eﬀect Size (d)

95% CI

DASS-21

−0.122

[−0.466, 0.222]

Quasi-experimental
(11 sessions/11 weeks)

Successful Self
Program

Proﬁle of Mood
Status

−0.124

[−0.495, 0.246]

MBSR

DASS-21

0.111

[−0.692, 0.914]

OTT manual

SCARED

−0.957

[−1.304, −0.61]

MFY

STAI

−0.664

[−1.356, 0.027]

Quasi-experimental
(6 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

Quasi-experimental
(6 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(12 weeks)

Test Edge

Pre-experimental
(4 sessions per
semester)

Stress management
and relaxation
strategy

TAI

BAI

−0.835

[−1.429, −0.241]

−0.549

[−0.985, −0.114]

Quasi-experimental
(12 weeks)

SMC (mindfulness)

DASS-21

0.034

[−0.544, 0.613]

282
(237-45)

Quasi-experimental
(16 sessions)

Quasi-experimental (7
sessions/1 week)

Mindfulness
meditation training

SAS

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions/6 weeks)

Mindfulness (L2B)

GAD

Mindfulness
(MBCT)
Yoga
Tai Chi

DASS-21

MBCT/MBSR

DASS-21

Quasi-experimental
(12 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

MBCUL
(MBCT/MBSR)

MBSR

STAI

HADS

−0.440

−0.170

−0.640
−0.519
−0.589

0.192

−0.505

[−0.952, 0.071]

[−0.546, 0.205]

[−1.010, −0.269]
[−0.886, −0.152]
[−0.973, −0.204]

[−0.054, 0.439]

[−1.209, 0.198]

−0.55

[−1.579, 0.479]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

12 of 23

Table 3. Cont.

Author/s (Year)

Country

McGrady, Brennan, Lynch, and
Whearty (2012) [56]

USA

Raes et al. (2014) [18]

Belgium

Ricarte, Ros, Latorre, and Beltrán
(2015) [57]

Ruiz-Aranda, Salguero, Cabello,
Palomera, and
Fernández-Berrocal (2012) [58]

Shearer, Hunt, Chowdhury, and
Nicol (2016) [59]

Spain

Spain

USA

Shian-Ling, Cheng-Kar, and Tian
Po (2015) [49]

Malaysia

Song and Lindquist (2015) [20]

South Korea

Spadaro and Hunker (2016) [50]

USA

Spahn, Walther, and Nusseck
(2016) [60]

Germany

Steinhardt and Dolbier (2008)
[51]

USA

Taylor et al. (2014) [23]

England

Van Gordon, Shonin, Sumich,
Sundin, and Griﬃths (2014) [52]

England

Educational Stage
(Range or Average
Age)*1

UE
(23.4 ± 2.36)

SE
(13–20)

PE
(6–13)

SE
(13–16)

UE
(-)

UE
(21–24)

UE
(19.6 ± 1.7)

UE
(18–25)

UE
(22.1 ± 2.3)

UE
(18–53)

UE
(28.61 ± 9.12)

UE
(20–42)

Sample
(EG-CG)*2

134
(52-82)

357
(182-175)

90
(45-45)

147
(78-69)

74
(52-22)

134
(77-57)

44
(21-23)

26

21
(13-8)

57
(30-27)

79
(40-39)

25
(14-11)

Study Type

Intervention
strategy*3

Instrument*4

Eﬀect Size (d)

95% CI

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

Wellness programs
strategies

BAI

0.120

[−0.226, 0.468]

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

MBCT

DASS-21

−0.443

[−0.653, −0.233]

MBI

STATIC

−0.799

[−1.228, −0.369]

Quasi-experimental
(10 weeks)

Training program
(INTEMO Project)

BASC

−0.331

[−0.657, −0.005]

Quasi-experimental
(4 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(4 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(10 weeks)

Pre-experimental
(8 weeks)

MBSR

STAI

Mindful-Gym

DASS-21

MBSR

MBSR

DASS-21

HADS

STAI

Quasi-experimental
(14 weeks)

Seminars to
overcome the MPA

−0.205

−0.250

−0.511

[−0.704, 0.294]

[−0.594, 0.093]

[−1.112, 0.089]

−0.607

[−1.163, −0.051]

−0.149

[−1.031, 0.732]

Quasi-experimental
(4 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

Transforming Lives
Resilience
Education

CD–RISC

0.467

[−0.06, 0.993]

MBCT-SH

DASS-21

−0.561

[−1.011, −0.111]

MAT

DASS-21

−1.297

[−2.165, −0.429]

Note. *1 Primary Education (PE); Secondary Education (SE); University Education (UE). *2 Control group (CG); Experimental group (EG). *3 How to Be an Ultra Super Student” (HBUSS);
Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR); “Overshadowing the Threat of Terrorism” (OTT manual); Making Friends With Yourself: A Mindful Self-compassion Program for Teens”
(MFY); Strong Minds Conditions (SMC); Mindfulness program Learning to BREATHE (L2B); Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR); Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT);
Mindfulness-based Coping with University Life (MBCUL); Mindfulness Emotional Intelligence Training Program (MBI); Music performance anxiety (MPA); MBCT self-help; Meditation
Awareness Training (MAT). *4 Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scales, 21 item version (DASS-21); Screen for Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders (SCARED); State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory (STAI); The Test Anxiety Inventory (TAI); Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI); Self-Rating Anxiety Scale (SAS); Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD); The Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale (HADS); State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Children (STAIC); Behavior Assessment System for Children and Adolescents (BASC); Connor–Davidson Resilience Scale
(CD–RISC).

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

13 of 23

3.3.2. Moderation Analysis

In the case of stress, calculated eﬀect sizes are not homogeneous and it is accepted that the real
eﬀects are not common in most studies. As a result, an analysis of moderating variables was performed
(Table 4).

With regards to treatment length, short-term interventions show near null eﬀect sizes (X = −0.03,
CI = [−0.45, 0.39]). Long-term interventions generally obtained small eﬀect sizes with some achieving
moderate eﬀects (X = −0.36, CI = [−0.56, −0.17]). Finally, interventions lasting between 5 and 8
weeks produced between a medium eﬀect size and a high eﬀect size (X = −0.45; CI = [−0.64, −0.26]).
In terms of educational stage, studies conducted in Primary Education obtained large eﬀect sizes
(X = −0.88, CI = [−1.15, −0.61]), while those carried out in Secondary Education produced small
average eﬀect sizes (X = −0.27, CI = [−0.54, −0.01]). Studies conducted with University students
produced medium eﬀects (X = −0.40, CI = [−0.55, −0.22]). In consideration of treatment strategy,
cognitive-behavioral programs show a small eﬀect size (X = −0.27, CI = [−0.61, 0.07]), whilst programs
based on mindfulness (X = −0.40; CI = [−0.54, −0.24]) and body therapy (X = −0.52; CI = [−0.88, −0.15])
show a medium-moderate eﬀect size.

Table 4. Analysis of anxiety moderators.

Study Groups

K *

M *

95% CI

p *

According to treatment length

Short duration (0–4 weeks)
Medium duration (from 5 to 8 weeks)
Long duration (more than 9 weeks)

3
14
9

−0.03
−0.45
−0.36

[−0.45, 0.39]
[−0.64, −0.26]
[−0.56, −0.17]

0.20

According to the educational stage of students receiving treatment

Primary Education
Secondary Education
University

2
7
17

−0.88
−0.27
−0.40

[−1.15, −0.61]
[−0.54, −0.01]
[−0.55, −0.22]

0.0009 *

According to intervention strategy

Cognitive-behavioral programs
Programs based on mindfulness
Body therapy programs (Yoga-Tai Chi)

8
18
2

−0.27
−0.40
−0.52

[−0.61, 0.07]
[−0.54, −0.24]
[−0.88, −0.15]

0.39

Note: * Number of interventions (K); Average eﬀect size (M); Statistically signiﬁcant (p).

The results show that the educational stage of students inﬂuences the likelihood of intervention
success, with studies conducted in Primary Education producing a signiﬁcant correlation (Q = 13.093
df = 2, p = 0.0009, R2 = 0.196). On the other hand, intervention duration is not related to intervention
eﬀect size (Q = 3.20, df = 2, p > 0.05), neither was the treatment strategy used (Q = 1.89; df = 2; p > 0.05).

3.3.3. Control of Publication Bias

To establish the eﬀect of publication bias on anxiety interventions, the number 140 was determined
as the total number of studies lost and Ns was established at 166. As can be seen, the number of lost
studies is less than Ns, conﬁrming that the results obtained from this meta-analysis are not threatened
by the publication bias.

3.4. Results Generated by Intervention Studies for Depression

3.4.1. Study Results of Depression Interventions

In the 25 studies that reported interventions targeting depression (Table 5), 28 eﬀect sizes were
calculated and 2481 students participated. Through assessment of signiﬁcance ﬁndings relating to the
data obtained (p < 0.00001) we can show that the mean eﬀect size weighted by the intervention groups
was X = −0.30 and CI = [−0.40, −0.19]. This corresponds to a small but totally relevant eﬀect (Cohen,

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

14 of 23

1988) [32]. The educational stage that provided the setting for the majority of depression related studies
is the university (n = 19), whilst the stage of Secondary Education contributed six articles.

Figure 5 presents a forest plot of anxiety in students. The Q statistic = 86.82 (p < 0.00001) which
indicates that the data obtained are signiﬁcant and homogeneous with respect to the eﬀect sizes
calculated. The I2 index of variance is 69%, which according to Huedo et al. (2006) [61] conﬁrms the
emergence of a medium-high heterogeneity. In addition, Z = 4.58 (p < 0.00001) which veriﬁes that the
meta-analytical results and intervention eﬀects are signiﬁcant, and the null hypothesis is rejected.

Figure 5. Forest plot of interventions targeting depression in students.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, x 17 of 24   Figure 5. Forest plot of interventions targeting depression in students. 3.4.2. Moderation Analysis Following moderation analysis of interventions targeting depression (Table 6), a small effect size was produced for short intervention duration ( = –0.25, CI = [–0.64, 0.14]), medium duration ( = –0.33; CI = [–0.47, –0.19]), and long duration ( = –0.25; CI = [–0.38, –0.13]). With regards to educational stage, studies conducted in both Secondary Education ( = –0.31, CI = [–0.47, –0.14]) and university ( = –0.27; CI = [–0.40, –0.15]) produced a small effect size, though a medium-moderate effect could be achieved depending on the range of effect. With regards to moderation according to the treatment strategy used, cognitive-behavioral programs show a small effect size that was close to a null effect ( = –0.06, CI = [–0.27, 0.14]). In body therapy programs the effect size is low ( = –0.27, CI = [–0.67, 0.14]), whilst the effect size is medium in mindfulness interventions ( = –0.40; CI = [–0.51, –0.27]). Table 6. Moderation analysis of interventions targeting depression. Study Groups K * M * CI to 95% p* According to treatment length  Short duration (0–4 weeks) 5 –0.25  [–0.64, 0.14] 0.32 Medium duration (from 5 to 8 weeks) 12 –0.33  [–0.47, –0.19] Long duration (more than 9 weeks) 8 –0.25  [–0.38, –0.13] According to the educational stage of students receiving treatment  Secondary Education 6 –0.31  [–0.47, –0.14] 0.21 University 19 –0.27 [–0.40, –0.15] According to intervention strategy  Cognitive-behavioral programs 6 –0.06  [–0.27, 0.14] 0.000 * Programs based on mindfulness 20 –0.40  [–0.51, –0.27] Body therapy programs (Yoga-Tai Chi) 2 –0.27  [–0.67, 0.14] Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

15 of 23

Author/s (Year)

Country

Educational Stage
(Range or Average Age)*1

Sample
(EG-CG)*2

Study Type

Intervention
Strategy*3

Instrument*4

Eﬀect Size (d)

CI to 95%

Table 5. List of studies targeting depression.

Aboalshamat, Hou, and Strodl
(2015) [37]

Saudi Arabia

Ando (2011) [9]

Japan

Bennett and Dorjee (2016) [19]

Wales

Bluth, Gaylord, Campo,
Mullarkey, and Hobbs (2016) [39]

Brennan, McGrady, Lynch,
Schaefer, Whearty (2016) [54]

Burckhardt, Manicavasagar,
Batterham, Hadzi-Pavlovic
(2016) [41]

Chen, Yang, Wang, and Zhang
(2013) [55]

Delgado, Ciria, Blanca, Mata,
Vera, and Vila (2015) [42]

USA

USA

Australia

China

Spain

Dvorakova et al. (2017) [21]

USA

Gallego, Aguilar, Cangas,
Rosado, and Langer (2016) [43]

Spain

Jain et al. (2007) [62]

USA

Johnson et al. (2016) [22]

Australia

Kang, Choi, and Ryu (2009) [45]

South Korea

Lynch, Gander, Kohls, Kudielka,
and Walach (2011) [46]

McGrady, Brennan, Lynch, and
Whearty (2012) [56]

England

USA

UE
(20–22)

UE
(19.1 ± 1.5)

ES
(16–18)

SE
(14–17)

UE
(23.3 ± 2.3)

SE
(15–18)

UE
(19.5 ± 0.87)

UE
(21.5 ± 3.94)

UE
(18.2 ± 0.4)

UE
(18–49)

UE
(18–61)

SE
(13.63 ± 0.43)

UE
(22.47 ± 1.17)

UE
(19–46)

UE
(23.4 ± 2.36)

Quasi-experimental
(6 weeks)

Self-Development
Program (HBUSS)

DASS-21

Quasi-experimental
(11 sessions/11 weeks)

Successful Self
Program.

Proﬁle of Mood
Status

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(6 weeks)

MBSR

DASS-21

MFY

SMFQ

−0.226

−0.361

−0.566

−0.611

[−0.571, 0.118]

[−0.733, 0.011]

[−1.385, 0.252]

[−1.299, 0.078]

BDI-II

−0.035

[−0.463, 0.392]

DASS-21

−0.264

[−0.845, 0.316]

130
(65-65)

191
(157-34)

24
(11-13)

34
(16-18)

42

46
(24-22)

60
(30-30)

41
(27-14)

109
(55-54)

81
(51-30)

258
(111-147)

32
(16-16)

16
(10-6)

134
(52-82)

Pre-experimental
(4 sessions per
semester)

Stress management
and relaxation
strategy

Quasi-experimental
(12 weeks)

Strong Minds
Condition
(mindfulness)

Quasi-experimental
(7 sessions/1 week)

Mindfulness
meditation training

Quasi-experimental
(3 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions/6 weeks)

282
(237-45)

Quasi-experimental
(16 sessions)

MBSR

SDS

BDI

Mindfulness (L2B)

PHQ

Mindfulness
(MBCT)
Yoga
Tai Chi

DASS-21

Quasi-experimental
(4 weeks)

Mindfulness (MBSR)
Relaxation training

DER

MBCT/MBSR

DASS-21

Quasi-experimental
(12 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

MBCUL
(MBCT/MBSR)

MBSR

BDI

HADS

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

Wellness strategies

BDI-II

0.086

−0.607

−0.245

−0.353
−0.474
−0.056
−0.842
0.202

−0.067

−0.703

−0.318

−0.214

[−0.419, 0.592]

[−1.266, 0.051]

[−0.622, 0.131]

[−0.717, 0.011]
[−0.840, −0.108]
[−0.432, 0.320]
[−1.384, −0.299]
[−0.335, 0.740]

[−0.314, 0.178]

[−1.417, 0.010]

[−1.336, 0.700]

[−0.562, 0.134]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

16 of 23

Table 5. Cont.

Author/s (Year)

Country

Educational Stage
(Range or Average Age)*1

Sample
(EG-CG)*2

Raes et al. (2014) [18]

Belgium

Roberts-Wolfe, Sacchet, Hastings,
Roth, and Britton (2012) [63]

Ruiz-Aranda, Salguero, Cabello,
Palomera, and
Fernández-Berrocal (2012) [58]

Shearer, Hunt, Chowdhury, and
Nicol (2016) [59]

USA

Spain

USA

Shian-Ling, Cheng-Kar, and Tian
Po (2015) [49]

Malaysia

Song and Lindquist (2015) [20]

South Korea

Spadaro and Hunker (2016) [50]

USA

Steinhardt and Dolbier (2008)
[51]

USA

Taylor et al. (2014) [23]

England

Van Gordon, Shonin, Sumich,
Sundin, and Griﬃths (2014) [52]

England

SE
(13–20)

UE
(20.10 ± 2.67)

SE
(13–16)

UE
(-)

UE
(21–24)

UE
(19.6 ± 1.7)

UE
(18–25)

UE
(18–53)

UE
(28.61 ± 9.12)

UE
(20–42)

357
(182-175)

58
(35-23)

147
(78-69)

74
(52-22)

134
(77-57)

44
(21-23)

26

57
(30-27)

79
(40-39)

25
(14-11)

Study Type

Quasi-experimental
(8 sessions)

Quasi-experimental
(12 weeks)

Intervention
Strategy*3

Instrument*4

Eﬀect Size (d)

CI to 95%

MBCT

DASS-21

−0.443

[−0.653, −0.233]

Samatha and
Vipassana

MASQ

−0.247

[−0.775, 0.280]

Quasi-experimental
(10 weeks)

Training program
(INTEMO Project)

BASC

−0.319

[−0.644, 0.007]

Quasi-experimental
(4 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(4 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(10 weeks)

Pre-experimental
(8 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(4 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

Quasi-experimental
(8 weeks)

MBSR

BDI-II

−0.270

[−0.770, 0.230]

Mindful-Gym

DASS-21

−0.445

[−0.791, −0.098]

MBSR

MBSR

Transforming Lives
Resilience
Education

DASS-21

−0.715

[−1.325, −0.104]

HADS

0.072

[−0.471, 0.616]

CD–RISC

0.467

[−0.06, 0.993]

MBCT-SH

DASS-21

−0.465

[−0.912, −0.018]

MAT

DASS-21

−1.297

[−2.165, −0.429]

Note. *1 Primary Education (PE); Secondary Education (SE); University Education (UE). *2 Control group (CG); Experimental group (EG). *3 “How to Be an Ultra Super Student”
(HBUSS); Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR); Making Friends With Yourself: A Mindful Self-compassion Program for Teens” (MFY); Mindfulness program Learning to BREATHE
(L2B); Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT); Mindfulness-based Coping with University Life (MBCUL); MBCT self-help; Meditation Awareness Training (MAT). *4 Depression,
Anxiety, and Stress Scales, 21 item version (DASS-21); Short Mood and Feelings Questionnaire (SMFQ); Beck depression inventory-II (BDI-II); Self-Rating Depression Scale (SDS); Beck
depression inventory (BDI); The Primary Health Questionnaire (PHQ); Daily Emotion Report (DER); The Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS); The mood and anxiety symptom
questionnaire (MASQ); Behavior Assessment System for Children and Adolescents (BASC); Connor–Davidson Resilience Scale (CD–RISC).

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

17 of 23

3.4.2. Moderation Analysis

Following moderation analysis of interventions targeting depression (Table 6), a small eﬀect
size was produced for short intervention duration (X = −0.25, CI = [−0.64, 0.14]), medium duration
(X = −0.33; CI = [−0.47, −0.19]), and long duration (X = −0.25; CI = [−0.38, −0.13]). With regards to
educational stage, studies conducted in both Secondary Education (X = −0.31, CI = [−0.47, −0.14]) and
university (X = −0.27; CI = [−0.40, −0.15]) produced a small eﬀect size, though a medium-moderate
eﬀect could be achieved depending on the range of eﬀect. With regards to moderation according to
the treatment strategy used, cognitive-behavioral programs show a small eﬀect size that was close
to a null eﬀect (X = −0.06, CI = [−0.27, 0.14]). In body therapy programs the eﬀect size is low (X =
−0.27, CI = [−0.67, 0.14]), whilst the eﬀect size is medium in mindfulness interventions (X = −0.40; CI
= [−0.51, −0.27]).

Table 6. Moderation analysis of interventions targeting depression.

Study Groups

K
*

M *

CI to 95%

p *

According to treatment length

Short duration (0–4 weeks)
Medium duration (from 5 to 8 weeks)
Long duration (more than 9 weeks)

5
12
8

−0.25
−0.33
−0.25

[−0.64, 0.14]
[−0.47, −0.19]
[−0.38, −0.13]

0.32

According to the educational stage of students receiving treatment

Secondary Education
University

6
19

−0.31
−0.27

[−0.47, −0.14]
[−0.40, −0.15]

0.21

According to intervention strategy

Cognitive-behavioral programs
Programs based on mindfulness
Body therapy programs (Yoga-Tai
Chi)
Note: * Number of interventions (K); Average eﬀect size (M); Statistically signiﬁcant (p).

[−0.27, 0.14]
[−0.51, −0.27]
[−0.67, 0.14]

−0.06
−0.40
−0.27

6
20

2

0.000 *

ANOVA results show that treatment strategy moderates the eﬀect achieved in interventions based
on mindfulness (Q = 6.14, df = 2, p = 0.048, R2 = 0.436). However, the duration of the intervention is
not associated with the eﬀect sizes (Q = 1.02, df = 2, p > 0.05), neither was the educational stage of
students (Q = 0.10; df = 1; p > 0.05).

3.4.3. Control of Publication Bias

The integrity of results relating to interventions targeting depression is threatened by publication
bias as the estimated number of lost studies (135) is slightly higher than the value determined for the
Ns (125).

4. Discussion

The purpose of the present meta-analysis was to compare the eﬀects produced by diﬀerent
meditation treatments and/or cognitive-behavioral programs on stress, anxiety, and depression in
students at diﬀerent educational stages, in addition to discerning the factors that moderate improvement
of these variables. Short-term (less than 4 weeks), medium-term (5–8 weeks), and long-term (more
than 9 weeks) interventions were identiﬁed. In addition, the diﬀerent interventions were classiﬁed
according to cognitive-behavioral therapy programs, mindfulness-based strategies, and body therapy
programs. In this way, it was uncovered that interventions targeting a reduction in the stress, anxiety,
or depression of students through meditation and/or cognitive-behavioral programs have a positive
eﬀect since as they produced improvements. We also emphasize that the number of investigations to

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

18 of 23

include this type of treatment is increasing. Further, the duration and type of intervention and the
educational stage of students are key factors that inﬂuence the extent of the eﬀect produced.

The 34 articles published in 2007–2017 obtained a medium-moderate eﬀect size for stress (−0.41)
and anxiety (−0.37), but a small eﬀect for depression (−0.30) [32]. Comparing these results with other
results from similar studies is a complicated task, because no studies have been found that considered
all three variables at the same time. Nevertheless, a meta-analysis conducted by Zenner, Herrnleben,
and Walach (2014) [64] uncovered evidence of eﬃcacy for interventions based on mindfulness in
students. They found that treatment eﬀects were more evident on stress, which is similar to that found
in the present study. Attending to the meta-analysis of Guillaumie, Boiral, and Champagne (2017) [65]
carried out on university students and nursing professionals, we can also see that similar results to the
present study were obtained in the way that a high eﬀect was reported for state anxiety and a moderate
eﬀect for depression and trait anxiety.

Regehr, Glancy, and Pitts (2013) [66] analyzed cognitive-behavioral interventions, mindfulness
approaches, and relaxation strategies targeting mental health in health students. Again, similar results
were obtained to those of the present research. Both this study and the present study found small
eﬀect sizes following treatment with cognitive behavioral programs. Mindfulness programs brought
about small eﬀects on anxiety and depression, relaxation approaches achieved a large eﬀect on anxiety,
a medium eﬀect on depression, and a low eﬀect on stress [1]. Further, a meta-analysis carried out
by Werner et al. (2017) [2] can also be considered in which child and adolescent participants were
included. This showed low eﬀect sizes for the prevention of depression and anxiety, a ﬁnding that
agrees with the present results provided for depression.

There is a real interest in introducing stress reduction programs during educational stages.
However, there are still few resources that evaluate and improve the eﬀectiveness of mental health
treatment within the school setting [67]. Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) approaches
are considered to provide acceptable, useful, and beneﬁcial interventions for adolescents. They have
been shown to reduce levels of anxiety and depression, which brings with it an improvement in
academic performance [19,22,46,48]. These discoveries coincide with Zenner et al. (2014) [64] and
Raes et al. (2014) [18] who document improved well-being and academic achievement in students
after MBRS treatment.

Mindfulness is an act in which attention is paid to the present and living the experience of each
moment without judgment. In this way, mindfulness-based training reduces symptoms of anxiety
and stress in students [21,55]. This evidence coincides with the studies of Jain et al.
(2007) [62]
and Kang et al. (2009) [45] who examined university students. They described an intervention that
emphasized muscle relaxation, diaphragmatic breathing, paying full attention to diﬀerent parts of the
body, non-critical awareness of what arises from moment to moment, and as self-reﬂection. This led to
improvements in problematic behaviors derived from poor mental health. The studies also support the
hypothesis that meditation techniques such as yoga, mindfulness, and tai chi contribute to a reduction
in emotional stress levels in students [43,47,52,59].

Similarly to this, interventions based on full consciousness have been shown to be eﬀective in
reducing depressive symptoms, negative aﬀect, and chronic concern in adolescents [42,57]. Observing
the eﬀects produced by treatments, such as the “Strong Minds Condition”, a large average reduction of
stress, anxiety, and depression can be seen in adolescents [41,62]. In addition, results of a regression
analysis carried out by Bluth et al. (2016) [39] are notable because they have indicated that continuous
practice of mindfulness predicts a decrease in depression, anxiety, and perceived stress in adolescents.
They also produce improvements in life satisfaction.

Brennan et al.

(2016) [54] and McGrady et al.

(2012) [56] propose that education and the
development of certain skills at university leads to positive behavioral change of students. According
to them, interventions should include awareness of breathing, muscle relaxation, coping skills, adequate
nutrition, and positive psychology to overcome the problems arising from mental health [49]. Personal
development programs in coaching have had a large impact on the psychological control and health of

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

19 of 23

university students. However, it has also been seen that results become less signiﬁcant as the length of
intervention increases [37]. In accordance, Holm et al. (2010) [44] found that levels of stress and mental
health improve with the application of personal development programs based on muscle relaxation,
whereas students exposed to the treatment program did not improve the parameters of anxiety and
depression. Therefore, treatment programs based on self-development and mindfulness considerably
reduce levels of stress, anxiety, and depression amongst the student body [20,23].

Cognitive behavioral therapy is considered one of the most popular types of psychotherapy
because of its eﬃcacy for anxiety disorders and emotional [68]. In the research literature presented by
Breso, Schaufeli, and Salanova (2011) [40], this type of therapy had a positive eﬀect on self-eﬃcacy
and commitment, whilst not being related to exhaustion in students. Emotional self-regulation tools
that seek to increase emotional self-awareness and improve stress management are noteworthy, since
they are eﬀective in reducing negative emotions and anxiety in students [44,53]. Ando (2011) [9]
has outlined an initiative for intervention programs. This initiative included the development of
social skills with the intention of targeting a speciﬁc psychosocial behavior. Results veriﬁed that this
strategy produces beneﬁts that impact anxiety in students, whilst not producing any positive eﬀects
on depression. This fact is supported by some studies that have veriﬁed direct associations between
depression and anxiety, interpersonal relationships, social self-eﬃcacy, and self-disclosure [15].

Exposure to war is another factor that can be examined in the ﬁeld of education and alters the
mental health of students in countries with a large degree of diversity [69]. Most of the disasters that
occur present a great challenge for health, with aﬀected populations seeing a large demand on their
mental health services [38]. To confront these circumstances, especially for the reduction of generalized
anxiety in childhood, programs that include physical activity, psychoeducational intervention, and
coping skills training are recommended [70,71]. As a result of training based on diﬀerent relaxation and
meditation techniques, active participants are able to overcome their concerns and meet the demand
for attentional resources associated with problems of stress, anxiety, and depression [50,51,60].

5. Conclusions

The present meta-analysis shows that the number of articles reporting interventions targeting these
variables in the educational ﬁeld is increasing. We identiﬁed 34 intervention studies published between
2007 and 2018, which reported diﬀerent durations and addressed the stages of Primary, Secondary, and
University Education. We found an average of three articles per year had been published on the topic
in the last decade. In relation to the study sample and countries where the interventions were delivered,
a total of 14 countries were recorded. The United States was the country with the most interventions,
although the European continent accounts for the majority of interventions developed. With regards to
the educational stage of the students targeted by interventions to reduce stress, anxiety, and depression,
it is observed that the university stage is the most popular setting, followed by Secondary Education.
Due to evidence on the emergence of problems at an early age, primary care should be encouraged
during early childhood stages to avoid these problems during adolescence and adulthood.

The eﬀect sizes calculated show that interventions based on cognitive-behavioral programs,
self-reﬂection, and mindfulness-based approaches produce satisfactory and signiﬁcant results in
relation to the reduction of stress, anxiety, and depression in students. This was also corroborated
by a good heterogeneity index. Taking into consideration the theoretical foundations of the studies
analyzed, meditation (mindfulness, yoga and tai chi), muscle relaxation and breathing, coaching, and
cognitive-behavioral therapy are strategies that have shown eﬀectiveness in improving mental health.
These aspects should, therefore, be considered as treatment variables in the academic ﬁeld. It has
been shown that programs of medium duration have the best eﬀect on improving mental health in
students. Additionally, programs based on mindfulness tend to produce the largest reductions in
stress, anxiety, and depression in students. Speciﬁcally, there is a greater eﬀect on students in Primary
and Secondary Education.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

20 of 23

In short, it is essential to focus attention on how to improve the mental health of students.
This implies an increase in the number of interventions in the classroom. The present evidence informs
the development of eﬀective activities to improve quality of life and eﬀectiveness and reduce the
problems of stress, anxiety, and depression amongst school children. The results obtained in this
meta-analytical study have some implications for the treatment of these psycho-social phenomena.
We have seen that mindfulness-based strategies are key to reducing mental health problems in students,
especially if we start to apply these techniques from early ages. Thus, an opportunity is presented for
the participation of teachers in educational research, in which they design intervention programs in
order to improve psycho-emotional and educational quality. In addition, there are no studies in the
ﬁeld of educational psychology that jointly address the treatment of these three mental health variables
in educational stages spanning youth to young adults. The present meta-analysis, therefore, allows the
aforementioned implications to be highlighted.

The main limitation of the present meta-analytical study is the size of the scientiﬁc sample, since
some educational stages had been scarcely examined. In addition, it was observed that some articles
of interventions targeting these variables had been published in journals from other research areas.
However, quality of the selected studies is veriﬁed by the rigorous review process that is conducted
before the paper is accepted for publication. Another aspect that would have broadened the review
would have been the inclusion of additional search terms such as “cognitive behavior”, “treatment”,
and “mindfulness”. Researchers are encouraged to continue carrying out diagnostic investigations of
the student population. A future perspective should be to develop didactic interventions such as those
described in the study plans, with the purpose of intervening to change this problematic situation.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.G.-V., F.Z.-O., J.L.U.-J. and P.P.-M.; methodology, G.G.-V. and P.P.-M.;
software G.G.-V.; formal analysis, G.G.-V., F.Z.-O., J.L.U.-J. and P.P.-M.; investigation, G.G.-V., F.Z.-O., J.L.U.-J.
and P.P.-M.; data curation, G.G.-V., F.Z.-O., J.L.U.-J. and P.P.-M.; writing—original draft preparation G.G.-V.;
writing—review and editing, G.G.-V., F.Z.-O., J.L.U.-J. and P.P.-M.; supervision, F.Z.-O.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to especially thank Emily Knox for her assistance in reviewing the
English version.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1.

Lo, K.; Waterland, J.; Todd, P.; Gupta, T.; Bearman, M.; Hassed, C.; Keating, J. Group interventions to promote
mental health in health professional education: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials. Adv. Health Sci. Educ. 2017, 23, 1–35. [CrossRef]

2. Werner, A.; Perry, Y.; Calear, A.; Newby, J.; Christensen, H. School-based depression and anxiety prevention
programs for young people: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 2017, 51, 30–47.
[CrossRef]

3. North, C.; Pfeﬀerbaum, B. Mental health response to community disasters: A systematic review. J. Am.

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

Med. Assoc. 2013, 310, 507–518. [CrossRef]
Pozo, C.; Bretones, B.; Martos, J.; Cid, N.; Alonso, E. Well-being in university students: Flourishing and
engagement as strategies against academic stress. Psychol. Health 2013, 28, 293.
Álvarez, J.; Aguilar, J.; Lorenzo, J. La ansiedad ante los exámenes en estudiantes universitarios: Relaciones
con variables personales y académicas. Electr. J. Res. Educ. Psychol. 2012, 10, 333–354.
Saxena, S.; Funk, M.; Chisholm, D. World health assembly adopts comprehensive mental health action plan
2013–2020. Lancet 2013, 381, 1970–1971. [CrossRef]
OMS. Draft Comprehensive Mental Health Action Plan 2013–2020; WHO: Ginebra, Switzerland, 2013.
Schönfeld, P.; Brailovskaia, J.; Bieda, A.; Zhang, X.; Margraf, J. The eﬀects of daily stress on positive and
negative mental health: Mediation through self-eﬃcacy. Int. J. Clin. Health Psychol. 2016, 16, 1–10. [CrossRef]
Ando, M. An intervention program focused on self-understanding and interpersonal interactions to prevent
psychosocial distress among Japanese university students. J. Adolesc. 2011, 34, 929–940. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

21 of 23

10.

Fida, R.; Paciello, M.; Tramontano, C.; Fontaine, R.; Barbaranelli, C.; Farnese, M. An integrative approach
to understanding counterproductive work behavior: The roles of stressors, negative emotions, and moral
disengagement. J. Bus. Ethics 2015, 130, 131–144. [CrossRef]

11. Piccolo, L.; Giacomoni, C.; Julio-Costa, A.; Oliveira, S.; Zbornik, J.; Haase, V.; Salles, J. Reading anxiety in L1:

Reviewing the concept. Early Child. Educ. J. 2017, 45, 537–543. [CrossRef]

12. Torrano, R.; Ortigosa, J.; Riquelme, A.; López, J. Assessment of test anxiety in compulsory secondary

13.

14.

education students. Revista de Psicologia Clinica Con Ninos y Adolescentes 2017, 4, 103–110.
Shin, L.; Liberzon, I. The neurocircuitry of fear, stress, and anxiety disorders. Focus 2011, 9, 311–334.
[CrossRef]
Saxena, S. Dialogues between neurscience and society. In Global Mental Health and Neuroscience: Challenges
and Oportunities; Society for Neurosciences: San Diego, CA, USA, 2016.

15. King, K.; Strunk, C.; Sorter, M. Preliminary eﬀectiveness of surviving the Teens

Suicide Prevention and
Depression Awareness Program on adolescents’ suicidality and self-eﬃcacy in performing help-seeking
behaviors. J. Sch. Health 2011, 81, 581–590. [CrossRef]

®

16. Townsend, L.; Musci, R.; Stuart, E.; Ruble, A.; Beaudry, M.; Schweizer, B.; Wilcox, H. The association of
school climate, depression literacy, and mental health stigma among high school students. J. Sch. Health
2017, 87, 567–574. [CrossRef]

17. Harring, H.; Montgomery, K.; Hardin, J. Perceptions of body weight, weight management strategies, and

depressive symptoms among US college students. J. Am. Coll. Health 2010, 59, 43–50. [CrossRef]

18. Raes, F.; Griﬃth, J.; Van der Gucht, K.; Williams, J. School-based prevention and reduction of depression in
adolescents: A cluster-randomized controlled trial of a mindfulness group program. Mindfulness 2014, 5,
477–486. [CrossRef]

19. Bennett, K.; Dorjee, D. The impact of a Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction course (MBSR) on well-being

20.

and academic attainment of sixth-form students. Mindfulness 2016, 7, 105–114. [CrossRef]
Song, Y.; Lindquist, R. Eﬀects of mindfulness-based stress reduction on depression, anxiety, stress and
mindfulness in Korean nursing students. Nurse Educ. Today 2015, 35, 86–90. [CrossRef]

21. Dvorakova, K.; Kishida, M.; Li, J.; Elavsky, S.; Broderick, P.; Agrusti, M.; Greenberg, M. Promoting healthy
transition to college through mindfulness training with ﬁrst-year college students: Pilot randomized
controlled trial. J. Am. Coll. Health 2017, 65, 259–267. [CrossRef]
Johnson, C.; Burke, C.; Brinkman, S.; Wade, T. Eﬀectiveness of a school-based mindfulness program for
transdiagnostic prevention in young adolescents. Behav. Res. Ther. 2016, 81, 1–11. [CrossRef]

22.

23. Taylor, B.; Strauss, C.; Cavanagh, K.; Jones, F. The eﬀectiveness of self-help mindfulness-based cognitive

24.

therapy in a student sample: A randomised controlled trial. Behav. Res. Ther. 2014, 63, 63–69. [CrossRef]
Singh, N.; Lancioni, G.; Karazsia, B.; Felver, J.; Myers, R.; Nugent, K. Eﬀects of samatha meditation on
active academic engagement and math performance of students with attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
Mindfulness 2016, 7, 68–75. [CrossRef]

25. Dick, A.; Niles, B.; Street, A.; Di Martino, D.; Mitchell, K. Examining mechanisms of change in a yoga
intervention for women: The inﬂuence of mindfulness, psychological ﬂexibility, and emotion regulation on
PTSD symptoms. J. Clin. Psychol. 2014, 70, 1170–1182. [CrossRef]

26. Yeh, G.; Wang, C.; Wayne, P.; Phillips, R. The eﬀect of tai chi exercise on blood pressure: A systematic review.

Prev. Cardiol. 2008, 11, 82–89. [CrossRef]

27. Hutton, B.; Catalá-López, F.; Moher, D. La extensión de la declaración PRISMA para revisiones sistemáticas

que incorporan metaanálisis en red: PRISMA-NMA. Med. Clín. 2016, 147, 262–266. [CrossRef]

28. Liberati, A.; Altman, D.; Tetzlaﬀ, J.; Mulrow, C.; Gøtzsche, P.; Ioannidis, J.P.; Moher, D. The PRISMA statement
for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions:
Explanation and elaboration. PLoS Med. 2009, 6, 1–28. [CrossRef]
Fleiss, J. Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. Psychol. Bull. 1971, 76, 378–382. [CrossRef]

29.
30. Cohen, J. A coeﬃcient of agreement for nominal scales. Educ. Psychol. Meas. 1960, 20, 37–46. [CrossRef]
31. Landis, J.; Koch, G. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics 1977, 33, 159–174.

[CrossRef]

32. Cohen, J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences; Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Mahwah, NJ,

USA, 1988.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

22 of 23

33. Hedges, L.; Shymansky, J.; Woodworth, G. Modern Methods of Meta-Analysis; National Science Teachers

Association: Washington, DC, USA, 1989.

34. Orwin, R. A fail-safe N for eﬀect size in meta-analysis. J. Educ. Stat. 1983, 8, 157–159. [CrossRef]
35. Rosenthal, R. The «ﬁle drawer problem» and tolerance for null results. Psychol. Bull. 1979, 86, 638–641.

[CrossRef]

36. Botella-Ausina, J.; Sánchez-Meca, J. Meta-Análisis en Ciencias Sociales y de la Salud; Editorial Síntesis: Madrid,

Spain, 2015.

37. Aboalshamat, K.; Hou, X.; Strodl, E. The impact of a self-development coaching programme on medical
and dental students’ psychological health and academic performance: A randomised controlled trial.
BMC Med. Educ. 2015, 15, 1–13. [CrossRef]

38. Berger, R.; Gelkopf, M.; Heineberg, Y. A teacher-delivered intervention for adolescents exposed to ongoing
and intense traumatic war-related stress: A quasi-randomized controlled study. J. Adolesc. Health 2012, 51,
453–461. [CrossRef]

39. Bluth, K.; Gaylord, S.; Campo, R.; Mullarkey, M.; Hobbs, L. Making friends with yourself: A mixed methods
pilot study of a mindful self-compassion program for adolescents. Mindfulness 2016, 7, 479–492. [CrossRef]
40. Breso, E.; Schaufeli, W.; Salanova, M. Can a self-eﬃcacy-based intervention decrease burnout, increase
engagement, and enhance performance? A quasi-experimental study. High. Educ. 2011, 61, 339–355.
[CrossRef]

41. Burckhardt, R.; Manicavasagar, V.; Batterham, P.; Hadzi-Pavlovic, D. A randomized controlled trial of strong
minds: A school-based mental health program combining acceptance and commitment therapy and positive
psychology. J. Sch. Psychol. 2016, 57, 41–52. [CrossRef]

42. Delgado, L.; Ciria, L.; Blanca, B.; Mata, J.; Vera, M.; Vila, J. Dissociation between the cognitive and interoceptive
components of mindfulness in the treatment of chronic worry. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 2015, 48,
192–199. [CrossRef]

43. Gallego, J.; Aguilar, J.; Cangas, A.; Rosado, A.; Langer, A. Eﬀect of mind/body interventions on levels
of anxiety, stress and depression among future primary school teacher: A controlled study. Revista de
Psicodidáctica 2016, 21, 87–101. [CrossRef]

44. Holm, M.; Tyssen, R.; Stordal, K.; Haver, B. Self-development groups reduce medical school stress: A

controlled intervention study. BMC Med. Educ. 2010, 10, 8. [CrossRef]

45. Kang, Y.; Choi, S.; Ryu, E. The eﬀectiveness of a stress coping program based on mindfulness meditation on
the stress, anxiety, and depression experienced by nursing students in Korea. Nurse Educ. Today 2009, 29,
538–543. [CrossRef]

46. Lynch, S.; Gander, M.; Kohls, N.; Kudielka, B.; Walach, H. Mindfulness-based coping with university life: A

non-randomized wait-list-controlled pilot evaluation. Stress Health 2011, 27, 365–375. [CrossRef]

47. Phang, C.; Mukhtar, F.; Ibrahim, N.; Keng, S.; Sidik, S. Eﬀects of a brief mindfulness-based intervention
program for stress management among medical students: The Mindful-Gym randomized controlled study.
Adv. Health Sci. Educ. 2015, 20, 1115–1134. [CrossRef]

49.

48. Phang, C.; Chiang, K.; Ng, L.; Keng, S.; Oei, T. Eﬀects of brief group mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for
stress reduction among medical students in a malaysian university. Mindfulness 2016, 7, 189–197. [CrossRef]
Shian-Ling, K.; Cheng-Kar, P.; Tian Po, O. Eﬀects of a brief mindfulness-based intervention program on
psychological symptoms and well-being among medical students in malaysia: A controlled study. Int. J.
Cogn. Ther. 2015, 8, 335–350.
Spadaro, K.; Hunker, D. Exploring the eﬀects of an online asynchronous mindfulness meditation intervention
with nursing students On Stress, mood, And Cognition: A descriptive study. Nurse Educ. Today 2016, 39,
163–169. [CrossRef]
Steinhardt, M.; Dolbier, C. Evaluation of a resilience intervention to enhance coping strategies and protective
factors and decrease symptomatology. J. Am. Coll. Health 2008, 56, 445–453. [CrossRef]

51.

50.

52. Van Gordon, W.; Shonin, E.; Sumich, A.; Sundin, E.; Griﬃths, M. Meditation Awareness Training (MAT) for
psychological well-being in a sub-clinical sample of university students: A controlled pilot study. Mindfulness
2014, 5, 381–391. [CrossRef]

53. Bradley, R.; McCraty, R.; Atkinson, M.; Tomasino, D.; Daugherty, A.; Arguelles, L. Emotion self-regulation,
psychophysiological coherence, and test anxiety: Results from an experiment using electrophysiological
measures. Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback 2010, 35, 261–283. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4394

23 of 23

54. Brennan, J.; McGrady, A.; Lynch, D.; Schaefer, P.; Whearty, K. A stress management program for higher risk
medical students: Preliminary ﬁndings. Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback 2016, 41, 301–305. [CrossRef]
55. Chen, Y.; Yang, X.; Wang, L.; Zhang, X. A randomized controlled trial of the eﬀects of brief mindfulness
meditation on anxiety symptoms and systolic blood pressure in Chinese nursing students. Nurse Educ. Today
2013, 33, 1166–1172. [CrossRef]

56. McGrady, A.; Brennan, J.; Lynch, D.; Whearty, K. A wellness program for ﬁrst year medical students.

Appl. Psychophysiol. Biofeedback 2012, 37, 253–260. [CrossRef]

57. Ricarte, J.; Ros, L.; Latorre, J.; Beltran, M. Mindfulness-based intervention in a rural primary school: Eﬀects

on attention, concentration and mood. Int. J. Cogn. Ther. 2015, 8, 258–270. [CrossRef]

58. Ruiz-Aranda, D.; Salguero, J.; Cabello, R.; Palomera, R.; Fernández-Berrocal, P. Can an emotional intelligence
program improve adolescents’ psychosocial adjustment? Results from the intemo project. Soc. Behav. Pers.
2012, 40, 1373–1379. [CrossRef]
Shearer, A.; Hunt, M.; Chowdhury, M.; Nicol, L. Eﬀects of a brief mindfulness meditation intervention on
student stress and heart rate variability. Int. J. Stress Manag. 2016, 23, 232–254. [CrossRef]
Spahn, C.; Walther, J.; Nusseck, M. The eﬀectiveness of a multimodal concept of audition training for music
students in coping with music performance anxiety. Psychol. Music 2016, 44, 893–909. [CrossRef]

59.

60.

61. Huedo, T.; Sánchez-Meca, J.; Marín-Martínez, F.; Botella, J. Assessing heterogeneity in meta-analysis: Q

62.

statistics or I2 index? Psychol. Methods 2006, 11, 193–206. [CrossRef]
Jain, S.; Shapiro, S.; Swanick, S.; Roesch, S.; Mills, P.; Bell, I.; Schwartz, G. A randomized controlled trial of
mindfulness meditation versus relaxation training: Eﬀects on distress, positive states of mind, rumination,
and distraction. Ann. Behav. Med. 2007, 33, 11–21. [CrossRef]

63. Roberts-Wolfe, D.; Sacchet, M.; Hastings, E.; Roth, H.; Britton, W. Mindfulness training alters emotional
memory recall compared to active controls: Support for an emotional information processing model of
mindfulness. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2012, 6, 13–25. [CrossRef]

64. Zenner, C.; Herrnleben, S.; Walach, H. Mindfulness based interventions in schools—A systematic review and

meta-analysis. Front. Psychol. 2014, 5, 603–623. [CrossRef]

65. Guillaumie, L.; Boiral, O.; Champagne, J. A mixed-methods systematic review of the eﬀects of mindfulness

on nurses. J. Adv. Nurs. 2017, 73, 1017–1034. [CrossRef]

66. Regehr, C.; Glancy, D.; Pitts, A. Interventions to reduce stress in university students: A review and

meta-analysis. J. Aﬀect. Disord. 2013, 148, 1–11. [CrossRef]

67. Meiklejohn, J.; Phillips, C.; Freedman, M.; Griﬃths, M.; Biegel, G.; Roach, A.; Saltzman, A. Integrating
mindfulness training into K-12 education: Fostering the resilience of teachers and students. Mindfulness
2012, 3, 291–307. [CrossRef]

69.

68. Oriol-Granado, X.; Mendoza-Lira, M.; Covarrubias-Apablaza, C.; Molina-López, V. Positive emotions,
autonomy support and academic performance of university students: The mediating role of academic
engagement and self-eﬃcacy. Revista de Psicodidáctica 2017, 22, 45–53. [CrossRef]
Jordans, M.; Tol, W.; Komproe, I.; De Jong, J. Systematic review of evidence and treatment approaches:
Psychosocial and mental health care for children in war. Child Adolesc. Ment. Health 2009, 14, 2–14. [CrossRef]
70. Montero-Cobo, J.L.; Polaino-Rodríguez, C.; Puertas-Molero, P.; González-Valero, G. Design of a diagnosis of
needs for adolescent students: Physical Education as an action resource. Educ. Sport Health Phys. Act. 2018,
2, 105–123.

71. Berger, R.; Pat-Horenczyk, R.; Gelkopf, M. School-based intervention for prevention and treatment of
elementary-students’ terror-related distress in Israel: A quasi-randomized controlled trial. J. Trauma. Stress
2007, 20, 541–551. [CrossRef]

© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
