# Shephard_2022_Neurocircuit models of obsessive-compulsive disorder limitations and future directions for research.

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022 Mar-Apr;44(2):187-200
doi:10.1590/1516-4446-2020-1709
Brazilian Psychiatric Association
00000000-0002-7316-1185

SPECIAL ARTICLE

Neurocircuit models of obsessive-compulsive disorder:
limitations and future directions for research
Elizabeth Shephard,1,20000-0000-0000-0000 Marcelo C. Batistuzzo,1,30000-0000-0000-0000 Marcelo Q. Hoexter,1 Emily R. Stern,4,5
Pedro F. Zuccolo,1 Carolina Y. Ogawa,1 Renata M. Silva,1 Andre R. Brunoni,1 Daniel L. Costa,1
Victoria Doretto,1 Leonardo Saraiva,1 Carolina Cappi,1,60000-0000-0000-0000 Roseli G. Shavitt,1 H. Blair Simpson,7,8
Odile A. van den Heuvel,9 Euripedes C. Miguel1

1Departamento de Psiquiatria, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Sa˜ o Paulo (USP), Sa˜ o Paulo, SP, Brazil. 2Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience (IoPPN), King’s College London, London, UK. 3Departamento de Me´ todos e Te´ cnicas em Psicologia, Faculdade
de Cieˆ ncias Humanas e da Sau´ de, Pontifı´cia Universidade Cato´ lica de Sa˜ o Paulo, SP, Brazil. 4Department of Psychiatry, The New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 5Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, New York, NY, USA.
6Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. 7Center for OCD and Related Disorders, New York
State Psychiatric Institute, Columbia University Irving Medical Center (CUIMC), New York, NY, USA. 8Department of Psychiatry, CUIMC,
New York, NY, USA. 9Department of Psychiatry, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 10Department
of Anatomy & Neurosciences, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a common psychiatric condition classically characterized by
obsessions (recurrent, intrusive and unwanted thoughts) and compulsions (excessive, repetitive and
ritualistic behaviors or mental acts). OCD is heterogeneous in its clinical presentation and not all
patients respond to ﬁrst-line treatments. Several neurocircuit models of OCD have been proposed with
the aim of providing a better understanding of the neural and cognitive mechanisms involved in the
disorder. These models use advances in neuroscience and ﬁndings from neuropsychological and
neuroimaging studies to suggest
the symptoms and
experiences of patients and dysfunctions in speciﬁc neurocircuits. Several models propose that
treatments for OCD could be improved if directed to speciﬁc neurocircuit dysfunctions, thereby
restoring efﬁcient neurocognitive function and ameliorating the symptomatology of each associated
clinical proﬁle. Yet, there are several important limitations to neurocircuit models of OCD. The purpose
of the current review is to highlight some of these limitations, including issues related to the complexity
of brain and cognitive function, the clinical presentation and course of OCD, etiological factors, and
treatment methods proposed by the models. We also provide suggestions for future research to
advance neurocircuit models of OCD and facilitate translation to clinical application.

links between clinical proﬁles that reﬂect

Keywords: Obsessive-compulsive disorder; clinical presentation; neurocircuit models; neurobiology;
treatment advances

Introduction

(OCD)

Obsessive-compulsive disorder
is a common
psychiatric condition traditionally described by irrational,
unwanted, recurring and intrusive thoughts (obsessions)
and excessive, repetitive, ritualistic behaviors, or mental
acts (compulsions). However, compulsions can be driven
by different types of motivations. Classically, they are
performed to relieve uncomfortable feelings generated by
obsessions. In this context, uncomfortable feelings are
associated, mostly, with fears of contamination or of harm
to oneself or others, persistent self-doubt, and intrusive
forbidden or taboo thoughts. The consequent repeti-
include repetitive
tive behaviors that produce relief

‘‘complete’’

hand-washing, cleaning, checking, and mental rituals such
as counting. Nevertheless, compulsive behaviors may also
be performed to relieve uncomfortable visual, auditory, or
tactile sensations and perceptions that things are not ‘‘just-
(sensory phenomena),1 such as
right’’ or
touching an object to achieve a certain tactile sensation or
ordering/arranging objects until they look symmetrical or
appear ‘‘just-right.’’ Due to impairments in the ability to inhibit
some of these repetitive behaviors, over time and with
repetition, compulsions can also become habitual and are
triggered by speciﬁc internal or external stimuli.2 Finally,
some compulsions may be driven by feelings of reward.2

Obsessions and compulsions are often chronic3 and
lead to signiﬁcant impairments in social, educational and

Instituto de Psiquiatria,
Correspondence: Elizabeth Shephard,
Hospital das Clı´nicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Sa˜ o Paulo, Rua Dr. Ovı´dio Pires de Campos, 785, Cerqueira Ce´ sar,
CEP 05403-903, Sa˜ o Paulo, SP, Brazil.
E-mail: lizzieshephard@usp.br
Submitted Dec 17 2020, accepted Mar 05 2021, Epub Jun 11 2021.

How to cite this article: Shephard E, Batistuzzo MC, Hoexter MQ,
Stern ER, Zuccolo PF, Ogawa CY, et al. Neurocircuit models of
obsessive-compulsive disorder: limitations and future directions for
research. Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44:187-200. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1590/1516-4446-2020-1709

188

E Shephard et al.

occupational functioning and reduced quality of life.4 The
most commonly used treatments for OCD are cognitive
behavioral therapy (CBT) and selective serotonin reup-
take inhibitor (SSRI) medication, which are effective in
signiﬁcantly reducing the severity of obsessions and
compulsions in many patients.5 Still, even with successful
reductions in disease severity, many patients remain
with residual symptoms and persistent functional impair-
ments and approximately half of patients do not res-
pond enough to ﬁrst-line behavioral or pharmacological
therapies.5

A prominent view in the scientiﬁc community is that a
better understanding of the neural and cognitive mechan-
isms involved in OCD could lead to new and effective
treatments that more precisely target the neurobiological
alterations that underlie obsessions and compulsions.6
Along these lines, several models based on neuropsy-
chological and neuroimaging ﬁndings in OCD have been
proposed to highlight dysfunctions in cortico-striatal-
thalamic-cortical (CSTC), fronto-limbic, and fronto-parie-
tal circuits involved in the condition7-9 (summarized in
Table 1). We recently extended this work by proposing a
neurocircuit-based taxonomy to guide the treatment of
OCD based on the idea that clinical proﬁles, i.e., experi-
ences, symptoms, and neurocognitive alterations, are
linked to speciﬁc neurocircuits10 (summarized in Table 1
and illustrated in Figure 1). We suggested different
neurocircuit-based treatment options,
including CBT
and SSRIs, but also novel and potentially more precise
neuroscience-based methods (e.g., repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation [rTMS], functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging [fMRI] neurofeedback) that could be used
to target
the neurocircuit alterations underlying the
different clinical proﬁles (Table 1 and Figure 1).

These models have been valuable in synthesizing the
vast clinical and neuroimaging literature in OCD and in
providing testable hypotheses concerning core phenoty-
pic and neurobiological proﬁles and neurocircuit-based
treatment approaches. Yet,
there are several crucial
limitations to existing neurocircuit models of OCD that
should be considered. The purpose of the current review
is therefore to critically discuss some of the limitations of
these models, including issues related to the complexity
of brain and cognitive function, the clinical presentation
and course of OCD, etiological factors, and treatment
methods proposed by the models, and to highlight direc-
tions for future research in the area.

Limitations related to the complexity of brain and
cognitive function

A key limitation of neurocircuit models is that they present
an over-simpliﬁed account of brain and cognitive function.
For
instance, neurocognitive functions do not neatly
map onto discrete neurocircuits as implied in the models.
As one example of this, dysregulated fear-like responses
to threatening and OCD-provoking stimuli have been
associated with overactivity in regions of the fronto-limbic
(amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex
circuit
the dorsal
[vmPFC]) and underactivity in regions of

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

cognitive circuit (dorsolateral/dorsomedial prefrontal cor-
tex [dlPFC/dmPFC]),11,12 brain effects that have been
proposed as a key neurocognitive alteration involved in
fear-based obsessions in models of OCD (Table 1 and
Figure 1). We have therefore suggested that treatments
for fear-based obsessions may be optimized by targeting
these two neurocircuits, speciﬁcally by decreasing fronto-
limbic hyperactivity and increasing dorsal cognitive
hypoactivity10 (Table 1 and Figure 1).

However, while meta-analyses have conﬁrmed that
dysregulated emotional responses are associated with
hyperactivity in fronto-limbic regions in OCD, they also
revealed consistent patterns of hyperactivation in other
regions, including the insula and temporal and parietal
areas.12,13 These ﬁndings indicate that altered activity
in a more extended neural network is involved in dys-
regulated fear in OCD. In line with these ﬁndings, meta-
analyses of neuroimaging studies in individuals without
psychiatric conditions have shown a broad network of
lobule,
regions,
inferior temporal gyrus, and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG)
to be activated during the processing and regulation of
fear and other negative emotions in addition to the
amygdala, vmPFC and dorsal prefrontal regions.14-16 It
is therefore difﬁcult to attribute dysregulated fear respon-
ses solely to the fronto-limbic circuit, which has implica-
tions for models proposing that selectively targeting
fronto-limbic circuitry could ameliorate fear-based OCD
symptoms.

including the insula,

inferior parietal

A related issue is that experimental

tasks used to
measure neurocognitive functions often do not engage a
single neurocognitive process, but multiple processes
and multiple underlying neurocircuits. This is true even
for very simple and well-designed tasks. For example,
the go/nogo task involves pressing a button rapidly to
a frequently-presented ‘‘go’’ stimulus and inhibiting the
button-press to an infrequent ‘‘nogo’’ stimulus. This task is
widely used to measure response inhibition (to the nogo
stimulus) in neuroimaging research and has revealed
consistent patterns of activation in the IFG on nogo trials
compared to go trials; these data have led to the widely-
held view that the IFG is a key mediator of response
inhibition.17 Findings of underactivation in the IFG com-
bined with poorer performance on nogo trials of this task
have been used to support
in several
neurocircuit models that response inhibition impairments
associated with hypoactivity in the ventral cognitive circuit
(which includes the IFG) is a key dysfunction in OCD
(Table 1 and Figure 1). Yet, compared to go trials, nogo
trials also more strongly engage other processes, includ-
ing conﬂict monitoring.18,19 Conﬂict monitoring is respon-
sible for ﬂagging when perception or behavior deviates
from what is expected.18,19 It is mediated largely by the
dorsal part of the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and is
associated with dopaminergic reward signaling in brain
regions involved in the ventral affective ‘‘reward’’ circuit.20
Thus, even a simple task such as the go/nogo involves
other neurocognitive functions and neurocircuits beyond
those it is designed to measure (i.e., response inhibition).
This has implications for neurocircuit models of OCD

the proposal

Neurocircuit models of obsessive-compulsive disorder: limitations and future directions for research

189

Table 1 Summary of neurocircuit-based models of OCD

Author

Overview of the model

Graybiel & Rauch7 These authors highlighted the importance of CSTC circuits in the neurobiology of OCD, with particular emphasis on the
‘‘OCD circuit’’ connecting the caudate nucleus, ACC and OFC. The authors linked dysfunctions in the OCD circuit to
alterations in executive function, reward processing and habit learning and proposed that these may contribute to the
production of obsessive-compulsive symptoms.

Milad & Rauch8

Van den Heuvel
et al.9

These authors extended previous CSTC models and the view that OCD could be considered a disorder of self-
regulation and inhibition to highlight the role of the amygdala and the production and regulation of fear in obsessive-
compulsive symptomatology. The model linked neurocognitive mechanisms to dysfunctions in three neurocircuits:
1) the ‘‘affective circuit,’’ which comprised the ACC/vmPFC, NAcc), and thalamus and was proposed to be involved in
processing affect and reward; 2) the ‘‘ventral cognitive circuit,’’ which consisted of the anterolateral OFC, putamen and
thalamus and was suggested to be involved in motor and response inhibition; 3) the ‘‘dorsal cognitive circuit,’’ which
included the dlPFC, dorsal caudate, and thalamus and was proposed to mediate working memory and executive
function. The authors also discussed the role of interactions between the amygdala and the affective and dorsal
cognitive circuits in impaired fear extinction in OCD. Finally, the authors discussed the possibility of targeting these
neurocircuits with deep brain stimulation and/or measuring their function as therapeutic markers to improve treatment
for OCD.

These authors further elaborated and expanded on Milad and Rauch’s8 model to consider ﬁve neurocircuits and
associated neurocognitive functions involved in OCD and other disorders characterized by compulsivity. These were: 1)
the ‘‘sensorimotor CSTC circuit,’’ which includes the SMA, posterior putamen, and thalamus and is involved in stimulus-
response based habit behavior; 2) the ‘‘dorsal cognitive CSTC circuit,’’ which connects the pre-SMA, dlPFC, dmPFC,
dorsal caudate, and thalamus and mediates executive control functions such as working memory, planning and emotion
regulation; 3) the ‘‘ventral cognitive CSTC circuit,’’ which includes the IFG, vlPFC, ventral caudate, and thalamus and is
involved in response inhibition; 4) the ‘‘affective CSTC circuit,’’ which connects the OFC, NAcc and thalamus and is
involved in stimulus-response based motivational and affective behaviors; 5) the ‘‘fronto-limbic circuit,’’ which includes
the vmPFC and amygdala, involved in the learning and extinction of fear responses. The model highlights the
importance of interactions between the circuits, for example with the dorsal and ventral cognitive control circuits
exerting top-down regulation of emotion mediated by the fronto-limbic and affective circuits. The authors also
considered neural mechanisms involved in treatments for OCD, including CBT, SSRIs, deep brain stimulation, and non-
invasive neuromodulatory techniques (rTMS, tDCS).

Shephard et al.10 We recently expanded on van den Heuvel et al.’s9 model to propose several ‘‘clinical proﬁles’’ that reﬂect different

phenotypic expressions of OCD, which we derived from patients’ reports of their subjective experiences of OCD
symptoms. We linked each clinical proﬁle with underlying neurocognitive alterations related to dysfunctions in the ﬁve
neurocircuits proposed by van den Heuvel et al.,9 and suggested speciﬁc treatment approaches targeting the clinical
proﬁles and neurocircuit dysfunctions that could be tested in future research (illustrated in Figure 1). These clinical
proﬁles were: 1) ‘‘dysregulated fear,’’ characterized by excessive and/or inappropriate and poorly controlled
physiological fear responses that are associated with obsessions and drive compulsive behaviors, mediated by
hyperactive fronto-limbic (amygdala, vmPFC) activity and hypoactive dorsal cognitive circuit top-down control of fear
responses; 2) ‘‘intolerance of uncertainty,’’ reﬂecting an inability to cope with uncertainty that contributes to obsessions
and repetitive behaviors (e.g., repetitive behaviors to attenuate uncertainty preoccupations), underpinned by
hyperactive fronto-limbic circuit activity; 3) ‘‘sensory phenomena,’’ i.e., aversive or uncomfortable perceptions or
sensations (e.g., the feeling that things are ‘‘not just right’’; the sensation of feeling dirty) that drive compulsive
behaviors, associated with hyperactivity in the sensorimotor circuit as well as the insula; 4) ‘‘excessive habit-formation,’’
reﬂecting long-standing compulsive behaviors, which were initially associated with recurrent and distressful thoughts,
ideas or images, but after multiple repetitions, over time, became more automatic, mediated by hyperactivity in the
sensorimotor circuit; 5) ‘‘impaired response inhibition,’’ i.e., difﬁculties in preventing inappropriate thoughts or behaviors,
linked to hypoactivity in the ventral cognitive circuit; 6) ‘‘altered reward responsiveness,’’ reﬂecting a reduced sensitivity
to rewards coupled with exaggerated anticipation of punishments in some patients which leads to feelings of relief/
reward obtained by completing compulsive and/or avoidance behaviors, mediated by atypicalities in regional activity
and functional connectivity within the ventral affective circuit; 7) ‘‘executive dysfunction,’’ including difﬁculties with
planning, working memory, and top-down emotion regulation due to hypoactivity in the dorsal cognitive circuit. In terms
of treatment strategies, we proposed that the ‘‘dysregulated fear’’ and ‘‘intolerance of uncertainty’’ proﬁles may be best
treated using therapies that aim to reduce hyperactivity in the fronto-limbic circuit (CBT, SSRIs, amygdala/vmPFC, fMRI
neurofeedback, deep brain stimulation targeting the ALIC) and increase hypoactive dorsal cognitive circuit top-down
control of the fronto-limbic circuit (CBT, dlPFC rTMS, medial PFC deep-TMS). We suggested that the ‘‘sensory
phenomena’’ and ‘‘excessive habit-formation’’ proﬁles could be addressed by treatments aiming to reduce excessive
sensorimotor circuit activity (habit-reversal training, SMA rTMS) and for sensory phenomena only, regulate insula
activity (H-coil insula TMS, ondansetron). For the ‘‘impaired response inhibition’’ proﬁle, we proposed treatments aiming
to increase ventral cognitive circuit hypoactivity (deep brain stimulation targeting the subthalamic nucleus and ventral
capsule/ventral striatum, fMRI neurofeedback of the IFG). For the ‘‘altered reward responsiveness’’ proﬁle, we
suggested therapies targeting reward mechanisms of the ventral affective circuit (SSRIs, dopamine-acting medications
such as methylphenidate, fMRI neurofeedback of the NAcc, deep brain stimulation targeting the NAcc). Finally, we
suggested that treatment approaches for the ‘‘executive dysfunction’’ proﬁle would involve increasing hypoactivity in the
dorsal cognitive circuit (CBT, methylphenidate, dlPFC, and pre-SMA rTMS or tDCS). Evidence for and against each of
these neurocircuit-based treatments is discussed in detail in the publication presenting the model.10

ACC = anterior cingulate cortex; ALIC = anterior limb of the internal capsule; CBT = cognitive behavioral therapy; CSTC = cortico-striatal-
thalamo-cortical; dlPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; dmPFC = dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; fMRI = functional magnetic resonance
imaging; IFG = inferior frontal gyrus; NAcc = nucleus accumbens; OCD = obsessive-compulsive disorder; OFC = orbitofrontal cortex; rTMS =
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation; SMA = supplementary motor area; SSRIs = selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; tDCS =
transcranial direct current stimulation; vlPFC = ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; vmPFC = ventromedial prefrontal cortex.

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

190

E Shephard et al.

Figure 1 Overview of the neurocircuit-based taxonomy to guide treatment for OCD proposed by Shephard et al.10 The ﬁgure
shows the ﬁve neurocircuits implicated in OCD and their associated clinical proﬁles and suggested treatment approaches
outlined by Shephard et al.10 ALIC = anterior limb of the internal capsule; CBT = cognitive behavioral therapy; dCaud = dorsal
caudate nucleus; dlPFC/dmPFC = dorsolateral/dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; fMRI = functional magnetic resonance imaging;
IFG = inferior frontal gyrus; NAcc = nucleus accumbens; OCD = obsessive-compulsive disorder; OFC = orbitofrontal cortex;
Pput = posterior putamen; rTMS = repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation; SMA = supplementary motor area; SSRIs =
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; STN/VS = subthalamic nucleus/ventral striatum; tDCS = transcranial direct current
stimulation; vCaud = ventral caudate nucleus; vlPFC = ventrolateral prefrontal cortex; vmPFC = ventromedial prefrontal cortex.

because ﬁndings from research using a particular task
may not reﬂect only the neurocognitive and neurocircuit
alterations purportedly engaged by that task.

This issue is further complicated by the low test-retest
reliability of neurocognitive tasks used in fMRI studies to
engage speciﬁc brain regions, i.e., the same individual
performing the task twice may activate different brain
regions across assessments. Elliott et al.21 have recently
demonstrated using both meta-analysis and analysis of
empirical data that neurocognitive tasks measuring emo-
tion, social cognition, inhibition, executive function, reward,
and even simple motor response production were poor at
eliciting consistent patterns of activation in the same brain
regions across repeated fMRI assessments in the same
individuals, all of whom were without psychiatric conditions.
The authors therefore concluded that currently used fMRI
tasks do not have sufﬁcient test-retest reliability to be used
for mapping associations between brain and behavior, nor
as biomarkers in the search for the neurobiological basis of
psychiatric conditions.21

Finally, the vast majority of research cited in support of
neurocircuit models of OCD has used the MRI/fMRI
technique, while ﬁndings from other methods of investi-
gating brain function such as electroencephalography
(EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) have rarely

been considered. This is important because EEG studies
have revealed a robust neural alteration associated
with OCD, i.e., increased amplitude of the error-related
negativity (ERN) component during error processing in
OCD.22 Evidence indicates that the ERN is generated by
the ACC and reﬂects an error detection mechanism
that ﬂags mistakes in behavior that should be corrected
(this component is similar to the N2 conﬂict monitoring
component discussed above).23 The consistency in ﬁnd-
ings of increased ERN in OCD in both individual studies
and meta-analyses suggests that enhanced error mon-
itoring may be an important mechanism involved in the
disorder. Yet,
these ﬁndings have generally not been
incorporated in neurocircuit models of OCD (Table 1).

One reason for this may be that the neurocircuit dys-
functions underlying enhanced ERN in OCD are unclear.
The ventral affective23,24 or ventral cognitive24,25 circuits
may be involved, but this is difﬁcult to infer from EEG
ﬁndings given the low spatial resolution of EEG. fMRI
studies also report increased ACC activity during error
monitoring in OCD, but activity alterations extend beyond
the ventral affective and ventral cognitive circuits.24
Further, enhanced ERN is not associated with OCD
symptom severity26 and does not change with successful
reduction in symptoms following treatment.25,27 It
is

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

Neurocircuit models of obsessive-compulsive disorder: limitations and future directions for research

191

therefore difﬁcult to know exactly how enhanced error
monitoring is involved in the neurobiology of OCD and
how, or if, it should be targeted in treatment (but see
recent work on ERN reductions following attentional bias
training in OCD28). Further work integrating ERN ﬁndings
in neurocircuit models and investigating how enhanced
error monitoring relates to the clinical presentation of
OCD and potential treatments will be an important step for
future research.

Furthermore, unlike fMRI, EEG and MEG can be used
to study oscillatory neural activity (the rhythmic activity of
populations of neurons) at the scalp (EEG) or within and
between cortical areas (MEG). Coordinated oscillatory
activity across brain regions is believed to be a key
mechanism in neural communication and the formation of
functional neural networks29,30 and is therefore highly
relevant for understanding neurobiological mechanisms in
psychiatric disorders. Indeed, EEG/MEG research has
revealed patterns of oscillatory neural network alterations
in several psychiatric conditions, which has led to the
development and testing of novel treatments designed to
target those alterations. For instance, consistent ﬁndings
of hypoconnected networks mediated by high-frequency
gamma oscillations involved in perceptual and cognitive
integration have been reported in schizophrenia31,32 and
have been linked with underlying imbalances in excitatory
glutamatergic and inhibitory GABAergic neurotrans-
mission.33 Consequently, novel pharmacological
treat-
ment approaches aimed at restoring excitatory/inhibitory
signaling have been investigated in schizophrenia and
were shown to reduce psychotic symptoms and restore
oscillatory gamma hypoactivity.34-36 Furthermore, EEG/
MEG neurofeedback targeted at increasing hypoactive
gamma oscillations has been tested in schizophrenia and
was shown to improve some of
the cognitive deﬁcits
associated with the disorder.37 Despite the richness of
information and therapeutic advances yielded by EEG/
MEG studies in other disorders, relatively few studies
have investigated oscillatory activity in OCD,38 and the
most methodologically rigorous studies have focused on
oscillatory mechanisms associated with deep brain stimu-
lation in treatment-refractory patients.39,40 There is there-
fore a need for further studies examining oscillatory
neural communication in OCD and for the ﬁndings to be
incorporated in neurobiological models of the disorder.

Limitations related to the clinical presentation and
course of OCD

Several further limitations to neurocircuit models are that
they do not address the complexities in the clinical
presentation of OCD. Speciﬁcally, the models consider
neurocognitive mechanisms and treatment strategies for
an individual clinical proﬁle associated with a particular
neurocircuit. For example, in our model we suggested
that sensory phenomena, which precede compulsions in
some patients, are linked to hyperactivity in the sensor-
imotor circuit10 (Table 1 and Figure 1).
In the real
world, however, clinical proﬁles and, consequently, their

underlying neurocircuit dysfunctions, co-occur
in the
same individual at the same time. For instance, the same
patient may experience sensory phenomena driven by
sensorimotor circuit overactivity and concurrent fear-based
obsessions driven by dysregulated fronto-limbic fear res-
ponses. In support, a recent study examining subjective
experiences of motivations behind OCD symptoms found
that a large proportion (56%) of patients reported both
feelings of incompleteness (sensory phenomena proﬁle)
and fear-of-harm (dysregulated fear proﬁle) to drive their
obsessive-compulsive behaviors, while p 25% reported
only fear or only incompleteness motivations.41 Mataix-
Cols et al.42 also showed that, within a single fMRI
scanning session,
the same patients showed different
neurocircuit dysfunctions depending on the type of OCD
symptom provoked, with hyperactivity in vmPFC (fronto-
limbic circuit) during washing symptom provocation and
altered activity in dorsal cortical regions (dorsal cognitive
circuit) during checking symptom provocation.

Neurocircuit models also often do not consider the
presence of co-occurring psychiatric conditions, such as
depression, anxiety, and chronic tic disorders, such as
Tourette syndrome, which manifest in a large proportion
of OCD patients.43,44 These disorders are themselves
associated with neurocognitive alterations linked to
neurocircuit dysfunctions, which may introduce or com-
plicate the presentation of neurocircuit-based clinical
proﬁles and treatment approaches in OCD.
Indeed,
experimental studies and comparative meta-analyses
suggest that OCD and other co-occurring mental dis-
orders are mediated by distinct but also common neural
substrates.45-50 For instance, Radua et al.45 reported
shared gray matter volume reductions in dorsal anterior
in patients with
cingulate and dorsomedial frontal gyri
OCD and other anxiety disorders compared to non-
psychiatric volunteers, which the authors suggested may
reﬂect common neurobiological alterations associated with
emotional processing and regulation difﬁculties in OCD
and anxiety disorders. In contrast, OCD patients showed
signiﬁcantly increased putamen and globus pallidus volu-
mes compared to non-psychiatric controls, while patients
with other anxiety disorders showed the opposite pattern.45
A recent experimental study reported alterations in
functional connectivity of
that
were associated with both OCD symptoms and tic symp-
toms in individuals with Tourette syndrome, suggestive of
shared sensorimotor circuit dysfunction between these
disorders.46 Likewise, high scores on an instrument
measuring sensory phenomena, which involve subjective
experiences preceding repetitive behaviors along the
continuum between OCD and Tourette syndrome, have
been associated with gray matter volume increases in
sensorimotor cortex.47 Similar ﬁndings of shared and
distinct neuroanatomical and neurofunctional alterations
in regions of the fronto-limbic, sensorimotor, and ventral
and dorsal cognitive circuits have been reported in meta-
analyses comparing neural correlates of inhibitory control
between individuals with OCD and other frequently-co-
occurring conditions including autism48 and attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).49 However, a more

the sensorimotor circuit

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

192

E Shephard et al.

recent and larger-scale study comparing brain structure
between OCD, ASD, ADHD, and non-psychiatric controls
found no overlap in structural alterations between these
disorders.50

i.e.,

Most neurocircuit models (with the exception of van
den Heuvel et al.9) do not consider longitudinal changes
in OCD symptoms and neurocircuitry across develop-
ment,
from childhood through adolescence into
adulthood and over time in each of these developmental
stages. Indeed, compared to the many studies conducted
in adults with OCD, considerably fewer have examined
the phenomenology and neural basis of OCD symptoms in
children. Existing studies indicate that OCD in children and
adolescents is phenomenologically similar to that observed
in adults, with symptom dimensions of cleaning/con-
tamination, symmetry/ordering, and fear of harm/unaccep-
table thoughts.51 Children with OCD are vulnerable to
co-occurring conditions, particularly tic disorders,52 depres-
sion and generalized anxiety,53 as well as functional
impairments53,54 and social difﬁculties such as peer
victimization.55 Cross-sectional studies comparing symp-
tomatology and clinical
features between adults with
early-onset of symptoms (in childhood or adolescence)
vs. late-onset (in late adolescence or early adulthood) indi-
cate more severe obsessions and compulsions56,57 and
higher co-occurrence of tic disorders58,59 in early-onset OCD.
In terms of neurocircuitry, neuroimaging studies in
children have reported alterations in activity of the CSTC
circuits, such as dorsal prefrontal hypoactivation during
OCD symptom provocation,60 that are similar to those
found in adult OCD.9,10 Yet, there also appear to be
differences in CSTC activation patterns between children
and adults, with children showing amygdala hypoactivity60
in contrast to the typically-observed hyperactivity of the
amygdala in adults.9,10 Cross-sectional studies including
child and adult participants with OCD have reported some
structural alterations that are shared between pediatric
and adult OCD (thinner parietal cortex) and others that
are speciﬁc to adult OCD (larger hippocampal and smaller
pallidum volumes) or pediatric OCD (larger
thalamic
volumes).61,62 Further, Busatto et al.63 reported decreased
regional neural activity in right thalamus, left ACC and
inferior parietal cortex in adults who had ﬁrst
bilateral
presented with OCD symptoms before age 10 years (early-
onset OCD) compared to adults with late-onset OCD
(ﬁrst symptoms after age 12 years), suggesting different
neurodevelopmental patterns of brain activation in these
subgroups. These ﬁndings suggest that neurocircuit alter-
ations in OCD may differ, at least in part, depending on the
developmental course of the disorder.

However, to truly understand neurodevelopmental tra-
jectories in OCD, longitudinal studies are needed and
these are less common, especially in child and adolescent
populations. Longitudinal studies examining changes in
symptoms over time in children64,65 and adults66,67 have
indicated that the types (or dimensions) of OCD symp-
toms experienced by patients remain remarkably stable
over time, with between-dimension shifts being relatively
rare (i.e., shift from symmetry/ordering to responsibility for
harm symptom dimensions),64,66,67 even as the speciﬁc
symptoms within a dimension do frequently change.65,68

Studies investigating longitudinal alterations in neuro-
circuitry in relation to OCD and OCD-relevant constructs
are difﬁcult to conduct and have been relatively rare, yet
the small number of studies that are available have
identiﬁed developmental changes in areas of fronto-striatal
circuitry, particularly in prefrontal regions. In a study of
typically developing adolescents and young adults, Ziegler
et al.69 found that greater self-reported compulsivity at 14
to 24 years of age was related to reduced myelin-related
growth over an approximately 1-year period in dorsolateral
frontal cortices (including ACC) and
and dorsomedial
ventral striatum, aligning with a cingulate-striatal
loop
previously associated with OCD in neurocircuit models
(Table 1). While observational (non-intervention) studies
identify localized areas of brain volume decreases during
development in OCD, a study looking at volume changes
related to CBT found increases in medial orbitofrontal
cortex (OFC) gray matter volume in response to CBT, with
a further increase present in a subsequent 2 year follow-up
period.70 Interestingly, this increase of OFC volume was
found only among younger OCD patients (those who were
8-12 years at baseline), but not older OCD youth (13-19
years) or typically developing control youth (who showed a
decrease in OFC volume in both younger and older age
groups), suggesting that CBT may alter the trajectory of
brain structure in OCD only if administered at a young age.
Future work should aim to investigate whether the
neurocircuit dysfunctions proposed in the models are
present at or even before the onset of OCD, for example
in children with subclinical obsessive-compulsive symp-
toms, and whether developmental changes of these cir-
cuits relate to changes in symptoms over time and the
transition from subclinical to clinical levels of OCD symp-
tomatology. Subclinical obsessive-compulsive symptoms
in children are associated with elevated co-occurring
symptoms of mood, anxiety, and psychotic disorders71
and functional
to those seen in
children who meet diagnostic criteria for OCD.53 Further,
large-scale population-based longitudinal studies show
that subclinical OCD symptoms increase in severity with
age,71 and that the severity of subclinical symptoms in
mid-to-late childhood (6-12 years) signiﬁcantly predicts
the severity of symptoms in late-childhood to adolescence
(age 9-17 years).72

impairments similar

Concerning neurocircuitry, a recent study reported
decreased functional connectivity between putamen/thala-
mus and limbic, sensorimotor and insula regions associa-
ted with subclinical obsessions and compulsions, ordering
and doubting, respectively, in children without OCD or
other neurodevelopmental or psychiatric conditions.73
A large, population-based study also reported signiﬁcant
associations between subclinical obsessive-compulsive
the
symptoms and increased functional connectivity of
sensorimotor circuit and decreased connectivity of
the
insula in children and adolescents,74 consistent with the
involvement of these circuits in OCD.9,10 A recent study of
brain volumes in a population sample of 2,551 children
found signiﬁcantly enlarged thalamic volumes in children
with elevated obsessive-compulsive symptoms, but with-
out an OCD diagnosis compared to children with low levels
of obsessive-compulsive traits,75 similar to ﬁndings in

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

Neurocircuit models of obsessive-compulsive disorder: limitations and future directions for research

193

children with an OCD diagnosis.62 These ﬁndings suggest
that some neurocircuit dysfunctions are likely present
before the emergence of clinically signiﬁcant symptoms,
which may pave the way for early interventions.

Limitations related to etiological factors involved
in OCD

Neurocircuit models of OCD do not consider the con-
tribution of genetic and environmental etiological factors,
or their interaction, to neurocircuit alterations. In terms of
genetic factors, twin and family studies have shown that
OCD is heritable, with elevated rates of OCD in ﬁrst-
degree family members of OCD patients.76-78 Twin studies
indicate that this heritability largely reﬂects shared genetic
factors.76 Further,
rather
neuroimaging studies report shared neurocircuit dysfunc-
tions in OCD patients and their unaffected siblings, inclu-
ding hyperactivity of the pre-supplementary motor area
during response inhibition79 and hyperactive error moni-
toring functions of the ACC,80 which may reﬂect neuro-
endophenotypes of OCD, i.e., neurobiological markers of
genetic risk for the disorder.

than shared environmental

Considering molecular genetics ﬁndings,

large-scale
genome wide association studies (GWAS) have demon-
strated that brain structure81 and functional connectivity82
are highly heritable. Meta-analyses of GWAS have revea-
led that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) asso-
ciated with increased risk for OCD signiﬁcantly overlap with
SNPs associated with increased putamen and nucleus
accumbens (NAcc) volumes83 and that genes associated
with OCD and compulsivity signiﬁcantly overlap with genes
expressed in the ACC, NAcc, and amygdala.84 These
that common genetic variants may
ﬁndings suggest
underlie dysfunctions in several of
the neurocircuits
proposed in models of OCD (Table 1) (see also Saraiva
et al.78). Yet, the functional impact and clinical translation
of these genetic variants continue to be a challenge mainly
due to the non-coding nature of the majority of these
variants and their pleiotropic effects.85 Further, although
gene expression follows a homogenous pattern across
type and
brain regions,
neurodevelopmental stage.86,87 Thus, early neurodevelop-
mental stages are likely to inﬂuence adult neuroanatomical
structures and behavioral phenotypes, which further empha-
sizes the need for longitudinal studies investigating neuro-
circuit dysfunctions, and the contribution of genetic factors,
across development in OCD.

is highly dependent on cell

it

In terms of environmental factors, childhood trauma is
associated with a diagnosis88 and a less favorable clinical
course (i.e., persistently severe symptoms over time)89 of
OCD in adulthood. The presence of childhood trauma has
also been shown to predict atypical structure of brain
regions included in neurocircuit models of OCD such as
the orbitofrontal gyrus.90 Furthermore, several studies
have revealed gene x environment interactions, with the
presence of alterations in genes involved in serotonin and
dopamine signaling91 and neurodevelopmental processes
such as synaptic plasticity92 increasing the elevated
susceptibility to OCD associated with childhood trauma.

the complexity of

Immune disorders that cause inﬂammation have also been
associated with OCD.93 Inﬂammation is recognized to
play a crucial role in atypical brain development94 and
neuroimaging work has found elevated inﬂammatory mar-
kers within CSTC circuitry in adults with OCD.95 Together,
factors that
these ﬁndings highlight
contribute to the presence and severity of OCD symptoms
and underlying neurocircuit dysfunctions. These factors
may also affect treatment approaches. For instance, while
childhood trauma was shown not
to adversely affect
treatment-related reduction of OCD symptoms,96 it has
been associated with co-occurring mood, eating and sub-
stance use disorders and suicidality,97,98 which may
complicate treatment choice and/or efﬁcacy in OCD.99,100
treatment
Augmentation of standard pharmacological
(SSRI) with anti-inﬂammatory agents has been shown to
improve treatment response in OCD,100-102 suggesting that
inﬂammation may be an important treatment target for the
disorder.

Limitations related to treatment methods

The effects of treatments such as CBT and SSRIs on
neurocircuit function need to be better understood, as do
those of more novel treatments (e.g., fMRI neurofeed-
back, rTMS) that are proposed to have more speciﬁc
modulatory actions on neurocircuit and neurocognitive
functions. For instance, regarding the more traditional
OCD treatments (CBT and SSRIs), CBT has been shown
to engage fronto-limbic and dorsal cognitive circuits invol-
ved in fear and emotion regulation,11,12 which led us to
propose that this treatment may be most effective for OCD
patients with clinical proﬁles associated with those two
neurocircuits10 (Table 1). However, recent studies inves-
tigating effects of CBT on whole-brain structural and
functional connectivity in OCD have reported widespread
changes in several networks beyond the CSTC and fronto-
limbic circuits, as well as changes in the interactions
functional networks.103,104 Similarly,
between different
based on neuroimaging and neurocognitive studies inves-
tigating fear and reward mechanisms in OCD, we pro-
posed that SSRIs may be particularly appropriate for
patients with fronto-limbic and ventral affective circuit
dysfunctions10 (Table 1). However, several neuroimaging
studies have revealed brain-wide effects of SSRIs, with
changes in several functional neural networks both follow-
ing a course of treatment in OCD105 and following acute
administration in non-psychiatric volunteers.106 Wide-
spread alterations in brain structure have also been found
in medicated compared to unmedicated individuals with
OCD.107 These ﬁndings indicate that CBT and SSRIs are
likely to affect a range of neural and cognitive mecha-
nisms. Further work testing the effects of these treatments
on a variety of neurocognitive processes will be required to
clarify for which clinical proﬁles and underlying neurocircuit
dysfunctions these treatments are most appropriate.

Furthermore,

in our neurocircuit-based taxonomy to
guide OCD treatment,10 we proposed that stimulation of
the dlPFC using rTMS may be an effective treatment
approach for OCD patients with the dysregulated fear
proﬁle (Table 1). Speciﬁcally, we suggested that dlPFC

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

194

E Shephard et al.

rTMS could restore activity in the hypo-functioning dorsal
cognitive circuit, thereby reinstating top-down control of
dysregulated fear responses mediated by hyperactive
fronto-limbic circuitry.
In support, studies have shown
improved functional connectivity between dorsal prefron-
tal and fronto-limbic regions following dlPFC rTMS in
patients with OCD108 and mood disorders.109 However, a
recent study using concurrent rTMS+fMRI to investigate
brain-wide effects of dlPFC rTMS in patients with dep-
ression revealed activity changes in a range of regions
throughout the frontal lobe as well as in primary soma-
tosensory cortex, subgenual ACC, superior parietal lobe
and temporal regions.110 Importantly, the activation in
each of these regions varied considerably across partici-
pants, with no two patients showing the same pattern of
activation across areas.110

Similarly, while Eshel et al.109 reported signiﬁcant
increases in functional connectivity between dlPFC and
fronto-limbic regions following 4 weeks of rTMS stimula-
tion of the dlPFC in depressed patients, they also found
rTMS-related increases in global dlPFC connectivity, i.e.,
signiﬁcant increases in connectivity between the targeted
dlPFC region and all other voxels in the brain. These
ﬁndings indicate that dlPFC rTMS has broad effects on
regional neural activity and functional connectivity, rather
than the neurocircuit-speciﬁc effects suggested in neuro-
the ﬁndings of Vink et al.108
circuit models. Further,
demonstrate that
there is considerable inter-individual
variability in the effects of dlPFC stimulation on other
brain regions and neurocircuits, suggesting that not all
patients may beneﬁt from this treatment in the same way.
There are also some barriers to clinical implementation of
rTMS. For instance, it is unclear what the most effective
stimulation protocols are for OCD in terms of the fre-
quency of stimulation, target, number of pulses per session,
number of sessions, and state dependency, and whether
the optimal stimulation protocol should be personalized
based on individual clinical or brain characteristics. Although
TMS passes through skin, bone, and fat without resistance,
there is a decline in intensity of the stimulation from the
center of the coil, which reduces the focality of the stimu-
lation and complicates the targeting of speciﬁc regions and
neurocircuits.111

A ﬁnal

limitation of a neurocircuit-based approach to
treatment for OCD concerns the process of selecting an
appropriate ‘‘speciﬁc’’ treatment based on an individual
patient’s clinical or neurobiological proﬁle. Important ques-
tions that arise here include whether the patient would be
required to complete a neurocognitive test battery, MRI
scan, or MEG/EEG recording before treatment is selected;
if so, are these measures sufﬁciently sensitive to detect
‘‘cutoff scores’’
impairments and what
individual-level
would be used given that most of these tests do not have
normative data indicating levels of
impairment? Would
a new ‘‘diagnostic manual’’ for the clinical proﬁles and
neurobiological alterations that could occur in OCD be
needed and is this feasible? Finally, could this type of
assessment work for under-funded public mental health
systems? This latter question is crucial, especially in the
context of psychiatric care for individuals in low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs) where the majority of

individuals with mental health problems may not receive
treatment.112 In some LMICs, particularly in Africa and
India, there is one psychiatrist for every 100,000 people.113
Access to psychiatric care is poor with long waiting times
even in high-income countries.112 It is difﬁcult to imagine
how a multi-method assessment that includes expensive
neuroimaging scans and neuromodulatory treatments
could be incorporated into general practice in psychiatry.
These practical questions must be addressed for neuro-
circuit models to be clinically useful.

Future directions: advancing neurocircuit models
of OCD and bridging the gap to treatment

Based on the limitations of current neurocircuit models
of OCD discussed in this review, we highlight several
avenues for further research in this area. A multi-method
approach is needed to clarify the clinical proﬁles and
underlying neurobiological mechanisms involved in OCD.
Studies should include systematic assessments of the
content of patients’ subjective experiences of symptoms
to identify clinical proﬁles and the extent to which such
in the same patients. Multi-modal
proﬁles co-occur
neuroimaging techniques (fMRI, MRI, EEG/MEG) and
carefully selected experimental tasks which engage the
different neurocognitive functions implicated in the clinical
proﬁles of OCD (fear regulation, sensory phenomena,
habit-formation, response inhibition, reward processing,
executive function) should be employed to more thor-
oughly characterize the neurobiological mechanisms that
are associated with different and clinical proﬁles and their
co-occurrence.

The combined use of different neuroimaging techni-
ques may also help to address issues concerning the lack
of speciﬁcity of experimental tasks in measuring particular
neurocognitive processes. For example, the high tem-
poral resolution of EEG means that neural activity can be
broken down into short (tens of milliseconds) ‘‘com-
ponents,’’ which are robustly associated with discrete
neurocognitive processes, e.g., in the go/nogo task a
component referred to as the ‘‘N2’’ reﬂects conﬂict moni-
toring and a later component, the ‘‘P3,’’ reﬂects inhibi-
tion.18,19,114 This information can be combined with high
spatial resolution data from simultaneously-recorded fMRI
to localize the neurocircuits associated with each neuro-
cognitive component.115 Together, these data would give a
clearer picture of the neural networks involved in the task
and how they are altered in OCD. A handful of studies
have used simultaneous EEG-fMRI in OCD (e.g., Gru¨tz-
mann et al.116), but the vast majority of research cited in
support of neurocircuit models of the disorder has emp-
loyed neuroimaging techniques independently. Repeated
neuroimaging assessments in the same individuals should
also be conducted to determine the reliability of neurobio-
logical alterations linked to clinical proﬁles. In addition,
several strategies could be used to address the low test-
retest reliability of experimental neuroimaging tasks in
eliciting patterns of brain activation. Previous work has
shown improved reliability of task-based fMRI measures
when they are computed from longer and repeated

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

Neurocircuit models of obsessive-compulsive disorder: limitations and future directions for research

195

scanning sessions117 and when they are combined with
other metrics, such as resting-state fMRI, in multivariate
analyses118 (for a full discussion, see Elliott et al.21).

to which those data-driven subtypes differ

Analytical approaches that are capable of integrating
information from multiple assessments and neuroimaging
techniques and relating that information to clinical proﬁles
are also required. Predictive modelling based on machine
learning pattern recognition algorithms will be an impor-
tant tool in this regard. This method seeks to ﬁnd the best
predictive model of an outcome, e.g., a clinical proﬁle,
based on all available information, which can include
neuropsychological task performance and structural and
functional brain activity measured at different levels.119
Importantly, predictive modelling avoids issues with multi-
ple comparisons and low statistical power that arise when
comparing multivariate data between clinical groups.119
Indeed, a handful of recent
large-scale studies have
conducted data-driven analyses using machine-learning
algorithms to investigate subtypes of OCD based on
resting-state functional connectivity patterns and the
extent
in
treatment response to CBT,120 and to investigate homo-
geneous subgroups of children with OCD, autism, or
ADHD based on integrated measures of brain structure
and clinical symptomatology.121,122 These studies indi-
cate that it is possible to identify subgroups within OCD
and also across traditional diagnostic categories that are
characterized by different neural alterations associated
with different clinical proﬁles121,122 or reductions in OCD
symptoms in response to treatment with CBT.120 A similar
analytical approach is planned for the latest phase of our
cross-site global study of OCD; we will apply machine
learning methods to ‘‘multi-modal fusion’’ data (i.e., com-
bined clinical, neuropsychological, and structural and
functional neuroimaging data) to identify brain signatures
of OCD.123 Such data-driven approaches will be impor-
tant for testing the subgroups of OCD related to under-
lying neurocircuit dysfunctions proposed in neurocircuit
models.

While large-scale studies using the aforementioned
multi-method approach and analytic techniques are needed
to conﬁrm the presence of clinical proﬁles and underlying
neurocognitive dysfunctions in the OCD population, so
too are n=1 designs with multiple measurements over
different experimental conditions to investigate whether
neurocognitive task performance and neural activity pat-
terns are reliably linked with clinical proﬁles at the level of
the individual patient. Recent work has indicated that
some neural activity patterns are reliably measurable at
the individual participant level
in non-psychiatric volun-
teers,124,125 although this analytical approach is still in its
infancy. Most research in OCD has focused on group-
level differences in brain structure and function and the
feasibility of
individual-level analyses will need to be
evaluated in this population.

In addition, there is an urgent need for longitudinal
studies to track stability and changes in clinical proﬁles
and neurobiological alterations over time in OCD patients,
under the inﬂuence of typical development, life events,
and treatments. The effects of genetic and environmental
factors as well as co-occurring conditions must also be

investigated in these studies. Particular focus should be
given to how these variables inﬂuence the presence of
different clinical proﬁles and neurocognitive mechanisms
and their waxing and waning course in OCD. Data on
genetic, environmental, and developmental factors could
also be incorporated in predictive modelling of clinical
proﬁles of OCD along with neuropsychological and neuro-
imaging data. One example of this longitudinal design is
the Brazilian High-Risk Cohort study (BHRC),126 which
follows a population sample of children over several years
and collects repeated measurements of clinical symp-
toms, including OCD symptoms, neuroimaging, and gene-
tic and environmental data. The Generation R study in the
Netherlands is of the same longitudinal design.75 Popula-
tion-based studies in children such as these are particularly
important since they provide the opportunity to study neural
alterations that occur before the onset of clinically signi-
ﬁcant symptoms of OCD. These studies therefore allow
inferences to be made about whether neural alterations are
involved in the causal pathway to OCD symptoms, in
contrast to cross-sectional studies of individuals with OCD
in which neural alterations reported could reﬂect conse-
quences of OCD symptoms and or epiphenomenal effects.
Steps needed to bridge the gap to clinical translation of
neurocircuit models include further empirical studies
investigating the effects of the treatment approaches pro-
posed in the models on the neural and cognitive functions
suggested to be associated with each clinical proﬁle.
Analyses testing whether OCD patients with particular
clinical proﬁles (e.g., dysregulated fear or sensory pheno-
mena) respond best to treatments that are suggested to
target neurocircuit alterations underlying those proﬁles
(e.g., CBT, SSRIs, dlPFC rTMS, and amygdala fMRI-
neurofeedback for dysregulated fear; habit-reversal
therapy, insula, and supplementary motor area neuromo-
dulation for sensory phenomena) are also necessary. This
should include n=1 designs assessing individual patients’
responses to different treatments, separated by wash-out
phases, as well as group-level analyses of
treatment
response in patients who share the same clinical proﬁle.
Crucially, research is needed to assess the most effective
method, such as predictive modelling, of identifying indi-
vidual patients with a particular clinical proﬁle, associated
neurocognitive alteration and neurocircuit dysfunction.

Finally, given the highly interactive nature of neurocir-
cuits and the evidence that neurobiological alterations in
OCD are not limited to changes in discrete neurocircuits,
an effective approach to treatment may be to target key
brain regions that act as connectivity ‘‘hubs’’ for several
neurocircuits. Hub regions are cortical or subcortical
areas that are characterized by a high degree of structural
or functional connectivity (i.e., number of connections)
with many other brain regions.127 As such, hub regions
are crucial for the integration of neural activity across
distributed brain areas and efﬁcient neural communica-
tion.127 In individuals without psychiatric conditions, hub
regions have been consistently found in parts of the ante-
rior, middle, and posterior cingulate, OFC, dlPFC, caudate,
inferior parietal lobe, cuneus, insula, supplementary motor
area, and somatosensory cortex.128-132 Neuroimaging
studies have reported selective disturbances in hub regions

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

196

E Shephard et al.

in OCD, with signiﬁcantly higher degree of connectivity in
the ACC, medial OFC, sensorimotor cortex, putamen,
and cuneus hubs and signiﬁcantly lower degree of con-
nectivity in the inferior OFC, insula, and posterior cingu-
late hubs in OCD patients compared to non-psychiatric
controls.130,132 Increased degree of connectivity in two hub
regions, the medial OFC and putamen, was also found to
correlate with OCD symptom severity.130,132 Treatments
for OCD may therefore be optimized by targeting hub
regions, which in turn may restore altered functional
connectivity in several connected neural networks.

Conclusions

The burden of OCD on the lives of patients and their
families, as well as the limited effectiveness of current
treatments in about half of patients, motivates research
on new treatments. The current approach of conducting
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that test the efﬁcacy
of treatments in reducing the severity of obsessions and
compulsions in groups of patients with OCD, but with
heterogeneous symptom proﬁles, has led to ﬁrst-line
treatments that can help up to 50% of patients. In the
search for more effective treatments for individuals that
do not respond sufﬁciently to ﬁrst-line treatments, new
strategies are necessary. Neurocircuit models of OCD
have provided an important bridge towards this goal by
linking aspects of the clinical phenomenology of OCD
symptoms (clinical proﬁles) to speciﬁc neurocognitive
alterations and underlying neurocircuit dysfunctions, which
could be targeted in treatment. The most recent model10
has also proposed speciﬁc treatment approaches for the
different clinical proﬁles and neurocircuit dysfunctions in
OCD, thereby creating testable hypotheses for a neuro-
circuit-based taxonomy for the treatment of OCD.

The present review highlights the limitations of current
neurocircuit models and the challenges that should be
addressed in further research in this area. These include
complexities in brain and cognitive function and their
assessment with experimental tasks, and the importance
of considering a wider range of neurobiological mechan-
isms and neuroimaging techniques and etiological factors
that may contribute to neurobiological alterations in OCD.
that clinical proﬁles, and consequently their
The fact
underlying neurocircuit dysfunctions, co-occur
in the
same individual at the same time, change across deve-
lopment, and are frequently accompanied by co-occurring
psychiatric conditions,
further complicates the current
interpretation of the scientiﬁc literature. Finally, current
treatments do not preferentially target a speciﬁc neuro-
circuit, and instead affect several different brain areas.
To address these limitations, we recommend several
avenues for future research,
including a multi-method
approach to clarify the clinical proﬁles and underlying
neurobiological mechanisms involved in OCD, data-
driven analytical approaches, and a greater focus on
individual-level analyses. Bearing in mind their limitations
and considering contemporary knowledge of brain func-
tions, current and future neurocircuit models in OCD will
in providing new treatment hypotheses to be
be useful

tested to improve the lives of OCD patients and their
families.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship
awarded to ES from the Fundac¸a˜ o de Amparo a` Pesquisa
do Estado de Sa˜ o Paulo (FAPESP) (18/22396-7) and
research grants from FAPESP (2014/50917-0) and Con-
selho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientı´ﬁco e Tecno-
lo´ gico (CNPq) (465550/2014-2) awarded to ECM as part
of the Instituto Nacional de Psiquiatria do Desenvolvi-
mento para Crianc¸as e Adolescentes (INDP).

Disclosure

RGS has received consulting honoraria from Lundbeck
and a travel grant from LIBBS. ARB has received funding
from FAPESP (2017/50223-6 and 2018/10861-7), CNPq
productivity support (PQ-1B), Faculdade de Medicina,
Universidade de Sa˜ o Paulo productivity support (PIPA-A),
is the chief medical advisor of ﬂow neuroscience (Malmo¨ ,
Sweden), and has a small equity in this company. HBS
has received research funds for a multi-site industry
sponsored clinical trial from Biohaven Inc., royalties from
Cambridge University Press and UpToDate Inc., and a
stipend from the American Medical Association for ser-
ving as an associate editor for JAMA Psychiatry. The
remaining authors report no conﬂicts of interest.

References

1 Miguel EC, do Rosa´ rio-Campos MC, Prado HS, do Valle R, Rauch
SL, Coffey BJ, Baer L, et al. Sensory phenomena in obsessive-
compulsive disorder and Tourette’s disorder. J Clin Psychiatry.
2000;61:150-6.

2 Ferreira GM, Yu¨ cel M, Dawson A, Lorenzetti V, Fontenelle LF.
Investigating the role of anticipatory reward and habit strength in
obsessive-compulsive disorder. CNS Spectr. 2017;22:295-304.
3 Bloch MH, Green C, Kichuk SA, Dombrowski PA, Wasylink S, Bill-
ingslea E, et al. Long-term outcome in adults with obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder. Depress Anxiety. 2013;30:716-22.

4 Hollander E, Stein DJ, Kwon JH, Rowland C, Wong CM, Broatch J,
function and economic costs of obsessive-

et al. Psychosocial
compulsive disorder. CNS Spectr. 1997;2:16-25.

5 Stein DJ, Costa DL, Lochner C, Miguel EC, Reddy YC, Shavitt RG,
van den Heuvel OA, et al. Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Nat Rev
Dis Primers. 2019;5:52.

6 Dougherty DD, Brennan BP, Stewart SE, Wilhelm S, Widge AS,
Rauch SL. Neuroscientiﬁcally informed formulation and treatment
planning for patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: a review.
JAMA Psychiatry. 2018;75:1081-7.

7 Graybiel AM, Rauch SL. Toward a neurobiology of obsessive-

compulsive disorder. Neuron. 2000;28:343-7.

8 Milad MR, Rauch SL. Obsessive-compulsive disorder: beyond
segregated cortico-striatal pathways. Trends Cogn Sci. 2012;16:
43-51.

9 van den Heuvel OA, van Wingend G, Soriano-Mas C, Alonso P,
Chamberlain SR, Nakamae T, et al. Brain circuitry of compulsivity.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2016;26:810-27.

10 Shephard E, Stern ER, van den Heuvel OA, Costa DL, Batistuzzo
MC, Godoy PB, et al. Toward a neurocircuit-based taxonomy to
guide the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Mol Psy-
chiatry. 2021 Jan 7. doi: 10.1038/s41380-020-01007-8. Online
ahead of print.

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

Neurocircuit models of obsessive-compulsive disorder: limitations and future directions for research

197

11 Paul S, Beucke JC, Kaufmann C, Mersov A, Heinzel S, Kathmann
N, et al. Amygdala-prefrontal connectivity during appraisal of
symptom-related stimuli in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychol
Med. 2019;49:278-86.

12 Thorsen AL, Hagland P, Radua J, Mataix-Cols D, Kvale G, Hansen
B, et al. Emotional processing in obsessive-compulsive disorder: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of 25 functional neuroimaging
studies. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2018;3:
563-71.

13 Pico´-Pe´ rez M, Moreira PS, Ferreira VM, Radua J, Mataix-Cols D,
Sousa N, et al. Modality-speciﬁc overlaps in brain structure and
function in obsessive-compulsive disorder: multimodal meta-analy-
sis of case-control MRI studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2020;112:
83-94.

14 Diekhof EK, Geier K, Falkai P, Gruber O. Fear is only as deep as the
mind allows: a coordinate-based meta-analysis of neuroimaging
studies on the regulation of negative affect. Neuroimage. 2011;58:
275-85.

15 Fullana MA, Albajes-Eizagirre A, Soriano-Mas C, Vervliet B, Car-
doner N, Benet O, et al. Fear extinction in the human brain: a meta-
analysis of fMRI studies in healthy participants. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev. 2018;88:16-25.

16 Pico´-Pe´ rez M, Alemany-Navarro M, Dunsmoor JE, Radua J,
Albajes-Eizagirre A, Vervliet B, et al. Common and distinct neural
correlates of fear extinction and cognitive reappraisal: a meta-ana-
lysis of fMRI studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2019;104:102-15.
17 Aron AR, Robbins TW, Poldrack RA. Inhibition and the right inferior
frontal cortex: one decade on. Trends Cogn Sci. 2014;18:177-85.
18 Donkers FC, Van Boxtel GJ. The N2 in go/no-go tasks reﬂects
conﬂict monitoring not response inhibition. Brain Cogn. 2004;56:
165-76.

19 Nieuwenhuis S, Yeung N, Van Den Wildenberg W, Ridderinkhof KR.
Electrophysiological correlates of anterior cingulate function in a go/
no-go task: effects of response conﬂict and trial type frequency.
Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2003;3:17-26.

20 Jocham G, Ullsperger M. Neuropharmacology of performance

monitoring. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2009;33:48-60.

21 Elliott ML, Knodt AR, Ireland D, Morris ML, Poulton R, Ramrakha S,
et al. What is the test-retest reliability of common task-functional
MRI measures? New empirical evidence and a meta-analysis.
Psychol Sci. 2020;31:792-806.

22 Riesel A. The erring brain: error-related negativity as an endophe-
notype for OCD -- a review and meta-analysis. Pyschophysiology.
2019;56:e13348.

23 Holroyd CB, Coles MG. The neural basis of human error processing:
reinforcement learning, dopamine, and the error-related negativity.
Psychol Rev. 2002;109:679-709.

24 Norman LJ, Taylor SF, Liu Y, Radua J, Chye Y, De Wit SJ, et al.
Error processing and inhibitory control
in obsessive-compulsive
disorder: a meta-analysis using statistical parametric maps. Biol
Psychiatry. 2019;85:713-25.

25 Thorsen AL, de Wit SJ, Hagland P, Ousdal OT, Hansen B, Hagen K,
et al. Stable inhibition-related inferior frontal hypoactivation and
fronto-limbic hyperconnectivity in obsessive-compulsive disorder
after concentrated exposure therapy. Neuroimage Clin. 2020;28:
102460.

26 Riesel A, Kathmann N, Endrass T. Overactive performance mon-
itoring in obsessive-compulsive disorder is independent of symptom
expression. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2014;264:707-17.
27 Riesel A, Endrass T, Auerbach LA, Kathmann N. Overactive per-
formance monitoring as an endophenotype for obsessive-compul-
sive disorder: evidence from a treatment study. Am J Psychiatry.
2015;172:665-73.

28 Klawohn J, Hajcak G, Amir N, Kathmann N, Riesel A. Application of
attentional bias modiﬁcation training to modulate hyperactive error-
monitoring in OCD. Int J Psychophysiol. 2020;156:79-86.

29 Cohen MX. Fluctuations in oscillation frequency control spike timing
and coordinate neural networks. J Neurosci. 2014;34:8988-98.
30 Uhlhaas PJ, Roux F, Rodriguez E, Rotarska-Jagiela A, Singer W.
Neural synchrony and the development of cortical networks. Trends
Cogn Sci. 2010;14:72-80.

31 Uhlhaas PJ, Singer W. Neural synchrony in brain disorders: rele-
vance for cognitive dysfunctions and pathophysiology. Neuron. 2006;
52:155-68.

32 Grent-’t-Jong T, Gajwani R, Gross J, Gumley AI, Krishnadas R,
Lawrie SM, et al. Association of magnetoencephalographically
measured high-frequency oscillations in visual cortex with circuit
dysfunctions in local and large-scale networks during emerging
psychosis. JAMA Psychiatry. 2020;77:852-62.

33 Uhlhaas PJ, Singer W. Abnormal neural oscillations and synchrony

in schizophrenia. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010;11:100-13.

34 Foss-Feig JH, Adkinson BD, Ji JL, Yang G, Srihari VH, McPartland
JC, et al. Searching for cross-diagnostic convergence: neural mecha-
nisms governing excitation and inhibition balance in schizophrenia
and autism spectrum disorders. Biol Psychiatry. 2017;81:848-61.
35 Light GA, Zhang W, Joshi YB, Bhakta S, Talledo JA, Swerdlow NR.
Single-dose memantine improves cortical oscillatory response
dynamics in patients with schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacol-
ogy. 2017;42:2633-9.

36 Pillinger T, Rogdaki M, McCutcheon RA, Hathway P, Egerton A,
Howes OD. Altered glutamatergic response and functional con-
nectivity in treatment resistant schizophrenia: the effect of riluzole
and therapeutic implications. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2019;
236:1985-97.

37 Singh F, Shu IW, Hsu SH, Link P, Pineda JA, Granholm E. Mod-
ulation of frontal gamma oscillations improves working memory in
schizophrenia. Neuroimage Clin. 2020;27:102339.

38 Perera MP, Bailey NW, Herring SE, Fitzgerald PB. Electrophysiology
of obsessive compulsive disorder: a systematic review of the elec-
troencephalographic literature. J Anxiety Disord. 2019;62:1-14.
39 Figee M, Luigjes J, Smolders R, Valencia-Alfonso CE, Van Wingen
G, de Kwaasteniet B, et al. Deep brain stimulation restores fron-
tostriatal network activity in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Nat
Neurosci. 2013;16:386-7.

40 Rappel P, Marmor O, Bick AS, Arkadir D, Linetsky E, Castrioto A,
et al. Subthalamic theta activity: a novel human subcortical bio-
marker for obsessive compulsive disorder. Transl Psychiatry. 2018;
8:118.

41 Schreck M, Georgiadis C, Garcia A, Benito K, Case B, Herren J,
et al. Core motivations of childhood obsessive-compulsive disorder:
the role of harm avoidance and incompleteness. Child Psychiatry
Hum Dev. 2020 Oct 12. doi: 10.1007/s10578-020-01075-5. Online
ahead of print.

42 Mataix-Cols D, Wooderson S, Lawrence N, Brammer MJ, Speckens
A, Phillips ML. Distinct neural correlates of washing, checking, and
hoarding symptom dimensions in obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004;61:564-76.

43 Brakoulias V, Starcevic V, Belloch A, Brown C, Ferrao YA, Fonte-
nelle LF, et al. Comorbidity, age of onset and suicidality in obses-
sive-compulsive disorder
(OCD): an international collaboration.
Compr Psychiatry. 2017;76:79-86.

44 de Mathis MA, Diniz JB, Hounie AG, Shavitt RG, Fossaluza V,
Ferra˜o Y, et al. Trajectory in obsessive-compulsive disorder comor-
bidities. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013;23:594-601.

45 Radua J, van den Heuvel OA, Surguladze S, Mataix-Cols D. Meta-
analytical comparison of voxel-based morphometry studies in
obsessive-compulsive disorder vs other anxiety disorders. Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2010;67:701-11.

46 Bhikram T, Arnold P, Crawley A, Abi-Jaoude E, Sandor P.
The functional connectivity proﬁle of tics and obsessive-compul-
sive symptoms in Tourette syndrome. J Psychiatr Res. 2020;123:
128-35.

47 Subira` M, Sato JR, Alonso P, do Rosa´ rio MC, Segala` s C, Batistuzzo
MC, et al. Brain structural correlates of sensory phenomena in
patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Psychiatry Neurosci.
2015;40:232-40.

48 Carlisi CO, Norman LJ, Lukito SS, Radua J, Mataix-Cols D, Rubia K.
Comparative multimodal meta-analysis of structural and functional
brain abnormalities in autism spectrum disorder and obsessive-
compulsive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2017;82:83-102.

49 Norman LJ, Carlisi C, Lukito S, Hart H, Mataix-Cols D, Radua J,
et al. Structural and functional brain abnormalities in atten-
tion-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder and obsessive-compulsive dis-
order: a comparative meta-analysis. JAMA Psychiatry. 2016;73:
815-25.

50 Boedhoe PS, van Rooij D, Hoogman M, Twisk JW, Schmaal L, Abe
Y, et al. Subcortical brain volume, regional cortical thickness, and
cortical surface area across disorders: ﬁndings from the ENIGMA

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

198

E Shephard et al.

ADHD, ASD, and OCD working groups. Am J Psychiatry. 2020;177:
834-43.

51 Højgaard DR, Mortensen EL, Ivarsson T, Hybel K, Skarphedinsson
G, Nissen JB, et al. Structure and clinical correlates of obsessive-
compulsive symptoms in a large sample of children and adoles-
cents: a factor analytic study across ﬁve nations. Eur Child Adolesc
Psychiatry. 2017;26:281-91.

52 Leonard HL, Lenane MC, Swedo SE, Rettew DC, Gershon ES,
Rapoport JL. Tics and Tourette’s disorder: a 2-to-7-year follow-up of
54 obsessive-compulsive children. Am J Psychiatry. 1992;149:
1244-51.

53 Alvarenga PG, do Rosario MC, Cesar RC, Manfro GG, Moriyama
TS, Bloch MH, et al. Obsessive-compulsive symptoms are asso-
ciated with psychiatric comorbidities, behavioral and clinical pro-
blems: a population-based study of Brazilian school children. Eur
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2016;25:175-82.

54 Piacentini J, Bergman RL, Keller M, McCracken J. Functional
impairments in children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive
disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2003;13 Suppl 1:S61-9.
55 Storch EA, Ledley DR, Lewin AB, Murphy TK, Johns NB, Goodman
WK, et al. Peer victimization in children with obsessive-compulsive
disorder: relations with symptoms of psychopathology. J Clin Child
Adolesc Psychol. 2006;35:446-55.

56 Fontenelle LF, Mendlowicz MV, Marques C, Versiani M. Early- and
late-onset obsessive-compulsive disorder
in adult patients: an
exploratory clinical and therapeutic study. J Psychiatr Res. 2003;
37:127-33.

57 Sobin C, Blundell ML, Karaviorgou M. Phenotypic differences in
early- and late-onset obsessive-compulsive disorder. Compr Psy-
chiatry. 2000;41:373-9.

58 Hemmings SM, Kinnear CJ, Lochner C, Niehaus DJ, Knowles JA,
Moolman-Smook JC, et al. Early- versus late-onset obsessive-
compulsive disorder: investigating genetic and clinical correlates.
Psychiatry Res. 2004;128:175-82.

59 Rosario-Campos MC, Leckman JF, Mercadante MT, Shavitt RG,
Prado HS, Sada P, et al. Adults with early-onset obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158:1899-903.

60 Brem S, Hauser TU, Iannaaone R, Brandeis D, Drechsler R, Walitza
S. Neuroimaging of cognitive brain function in paediatric obsessive-
compulsive disorder: a review of the literature and preliminary meta-
analysis. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2012;119:1425-48.

61 Boedhoe PS, Schmaal L, Abe Y, Ameis SH, Arnold PD, Batistuzzo
MC, et al. Distinct subcortical volume alterations in pediatric and
adult OCD: a worldwide meta- and mega-analysis. Am J Psychiatry.
2017;174:60-9.

62 Boedhoe PS, Schmaal L, Abe Y, Alonso P, Ameis SH, Antevic A,
et al. Cortical abnormalities associated with pediatric and adult
obsessive-compulsive disorder: ﬁndings from the ENIGMA Obses-
sive-Compulsive Disorder Working Group. Am J Psychiatry. 2018;
175:453-62.

63 Busatto GF, Buchpiguel CA, Zamignani DR, Garrido GE, Glabus MF,
Rosario-Campos MC, et al. Regional cerebral blood ﬂow abnormal-
ities in early-onset obsessive-compulsive disorder: an exploratory
SPECT study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2001;40:347-54.
64 Delorme R, Bille A, Betancur C, Mathieu F, Chabane N, Mouren-
Simeoni MC, et al. Exploratory analysis of obsessive-compulsive
symptom dimensions in children and adolescents: a prospective
follow-up study. BMC Psychiatry. 2006;6:1.

65 Rettew DC, Swedo SE, Leonard HL, Lenane MC, Rapoport JL.
Obsessions and compulsions across time in 79 children and ado-
lescents with obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 1992;31:1050-6.

66 Mataix-Cols D, Rauch SL, Baer L, Eisen JL, Shera DM, Goodman
WK, et al. Symptom stability in adult obsessive-compulsive disorder:
data from a naturalistic two-year follow-up study. Am J Psychiatry.
2002;159:263-8.

67 Rufer M, Grothusen A, Mass R, Peter H, Hand I. Temporal stability
of symptom dimensions in adult patients with obsessive-compulsive
disorder. J Affect Disord. 2005;88:99-102.

68 Skoog G, Skoog I. A 40-year follow-up of patients with obsessive-
compulsive disorder [see comments]. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1999;
56:121-7.

69 Ziegler G, Hauser TU, Moutoussis M, Bullmore ET, Goodyer IM,
Fonagy P, et al. Compulsivity and impulsivity traits linked to

attenuated developmental
Nat Neurosci. 2019;22:992-9.

frontostriatal myelination trajectories

70 Huyser C, van den Heuvel OA, Wolters L, de Haan E, Lindauer R,
Veltman DJ. A longitudinal VBM study in paediatric obsessive-
compulsive disorder at 2-year follow-up after cognitive behavioural
therapy. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2014;15:443-52.

71 Alvarenga PG, Cesar RC, Leckman JF, Moriyama TS, Torres AR,
Bloch MH, et al. Obsessive-compulsive symptom dimensions in a
population-based, cross-sectional sample of school-aged children
J Psychiatr Res. 2015;62:108-14.

72 de Barros PM, do Rosario MC, Szeiko N, Polga N, de Lima Requena
G, Ravagnani B, et al. Risk factors for obsessive-compulsive
symptoms. Follow-up of a community-based youth cohort. Eur Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2021;30:89-104.

73 Sun˜ ol M, Saiz-Masvidal C, Contreras-Rodrı´guez O, Macia` D, Mar-
tı´nez-Vilavella G, Martı´nez-Zalacaı´n I, et al. Brain functional con-
nectivity correlates of subclinical obsessive-compulsive symptoms
in healthy children. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2020
Sep 18;S0890-8567(20): 31836-0. doi: 10.1016/j.jaac.2020.08.435.
Online ahead of print.

74 Hoexter MQ, Biazoli CE Jr, Alvarenga PG, Batistuzzo MC, Salum
GA, Gadelha A, et al. Low frequency ﬂuctuation of brain sponta-
neous activity and obsessive-compulsive symptoms in a large
school-age sample. J Psychiatr Res. 2018;96:224-30.

75 Weeland CJ, White T, Vriend C, Muetzel RL, Starreveld J, Hillegers
MH, et al. Brain morphology associated with obsessive-compulsive
symptoms in 2,551 children from the general population. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2021;60:470-8.

76 Huang MH, Cheng CM, Tsai SJ, Bai YM, Li CT, Lin WC, et al.
Familial coaggregation of major psychiatric disorders among ﬁrst-
degree relatives of patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder:
a nationwide study. Psychol Med. 2021;51:680-7.

77 Mataix-Cols D, Boman M, Monzani B, Ru¨ ck C, Serlachius E,
La˚ ngstro¨m N, et al. Population-based, multigenerational
family
clustering study of obsessive-compulsive disorder. JAMA Psy-
chiatry. 2013;70:709-17.

78 Saraiva LC, Cappi C, Simpson HB, Stein DJ, Viswanath B, van den
Heuvel OA, et al. Cutting-edge genetics in obsessive-compulsive
disorder. Fac Rev. 2020;9:30.

79 de Wit SJ, de Vries FE, van der Werf YD, Cath DC, Heslenfeld DJ,
Veltman EM, et al. Presupplementary motor area hyperactivity
during response inhibition: a candidate endophenotype of obses-
sive-compulsive disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2012;169:1100-8.
80 Riesel A, Endrass T, Kaufmann C, Kathmann N. Overactive error-
related brain activity as a candidate endophenotype for obses-
sive-compulsive disorder: evidence from unaffected ﬁrst-degree
relatives. Am J Psychiatry. 2011;168:317-24.

81 Winkler AM, Kochunov P, Blangero J, Almasy L, Zilles K, Fox PT,
et al. Cortical thickness or grey matter volume? The importance of
selecting the phenotype for imaging genetics studies. Neuroimage.
2010;53:1135-46.

82 Colclough GL, Smith SM, Nichols TE, Winkler AM, Sotiropoulos SN,
Glasser MF, et al. The heritability of multi-modal connectivity in
human brain activity. Elife. 2017;6:e20178.

83 Hibar DP, Cheung JW, Medland SE, Mufford MS, Jahanshad N,
Dalvie S, et al. Signiﬁcant concordance of genetic variation that
increases both the risk for obsessive-compulsive disorder and the
volumes of the nucleus accumbens and putamen. Br J Psychiatry.
2018;213:430-6.

84 Smit DJ, Cath D, Zilha˜ o NR, Ip HF, Denys D, den Braber A, et al.
Genetic meta-analysis of obsessive-compulsive disorder and self-
-report compulsive symptoms. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr
Genet. 2020;183:208-16.

85 Maurano MT, Humbert R, Rynes E, Thurman RE, Haugen E, Wang
H, et al. Systematic localization of common disease-associated
variation in regulatory DNA. Science. 2012;337:1190-5.

86 Kang HJ, Kawasawa YI, Cheng F, Zhu Y, Xu X, Li M, et al. Spatio-
temporal transcriptome of the human brain. Nature. 2011;478:483-9.
87 Li X, Kim Y, Tsang EK, Davis JR, Damani FN, Chiang C, et al. The
impact of rare variation on gene expression across tissues. Nature.
2017;550:239-43.

88 Lochner C, du Toit PL, Zungu-Dirwayi N, Marais A, van Kradenburg
J, Seedat S, et al. Childhood trauma in obsessive-compulsive dis-
order, trichotillomania, and controls. Depress Anxiety. 2002;15:66-8.

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

Neurocircuit models of obsessive-compulsive disorder: limitations and future directions for research

199

89 Tibi L, van Oppen P, van Balkom AJ, Eikelenboom M, Hendriks GJ,
Anholt GE. Childhood trauma and attachment style predict the four-
year course of obsessive compulsive disorder: ﬁndings from the
Netherlands obsessive compulsive disorder study. J Affect Disord.
2020;264:206-14.

90 Brooks SJ, Naidoo V, Roos A, Fouche´ JP, Lochner C, Stein DJ.
Early-life adversity and orbitofrontal and cerebellar volumes in adults
with obsessive-compulsive disorder: voxel-based morphometry
study. Br J Psychiatry. 2016;208:34-41.

91 McGregor NW, Hemmings SM, Erdman L, Calmarza-Font I, Stein
DJ, Lochner C. Modiﬁcation of
the association between early
adversity and obsessive-compulsive disorder by polymorphisms in
the MAOA, MAOB and COMT genes. Psychiatry Res. 2016;246:
527-32.

92 Hemmings SM, Lochner C, van der Merwe L, Cath DC, Seedat S,
Stein DJ. BDNF Val66Met modiﬁes the risk of childhood trauma
on obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Psychiatr Res. 2013;47:
1857-63.

93 Westwell-Roper C, Williams KA, Samuels J, Bienvenu OJ, Cullen B,
Goes FS, et al. Immune-related comorbidities in childhood-onset
obsessive compulsive disorder: lifetime prevalence in the Obsessive
Compulsive Disorder Collaborative Genetics Association Study.
J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2019;29:615-24.

94 Suchdev PS, Boivin MJ, Forsyth BW, Georgieff MK, Guerrant RL,
Nelson CA 3rd. Assessment of neurodevelopment, nutrition, and
inﬂammation from fetal life to adolescence in low-resource settings.
Pediatrics. 2017;139(Suppl. 1):S23-37.

95 Attwells S, Setiawan E, Wilson AA, Rusjan PM, Mizrahi R, Miler L,
et al. Inﬂammation in the neurocircuitry of obsessive-compulsive
disorder. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017;74:833-40.

96 Boger S, Ehring T, Berberich G, Werner GG. Impact of childhood
maltreatment on obsessive-compulsive disorder symptom severity
and treatment outcome. Eur J Psychotraumatol. 2020;11:1753942.
97 Ay R, Erbay LG. Relationship between childhood trauma and
suicide probability in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatry
Res. 2018;261:132-6.

98 Visser HA, van Minnen A, van Megen H, Eikelenboom M, Hoo-
gendoorn AW, Kaarsemaker M, et al. The relationship between
adverse childhood experiences and symptom severity, chronicity,
and comorbidity in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder.
J Clin Psychiatry. 2014;75:1034-9.

99 Pallanti S, Grassi G, Sarrecchia ED, Cantisani A, Pellegrini M.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder comorbidity: clinical assessment
and therapeutic implications. Front Psychiatry. 2011;2:70.

100 Storch EA, Merlo LJ, Larson MJ, Geffken GR, Lehmkuhl HD, Jacob
ML, et al. Impact of comorbidity on cognitive-behavioral therapy
response in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2008;47:583-92.

101 Sayyah M, Boostani H, Pakseresht S, Malayeri A. A preliminary
randomized double-blind clinical trial on the efﬁcacy of celecoxib as
an adjunct
in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Psychiatry Res. 2011;189:403-6.

102 Shalbafan M, Mohammadinejad P, Shariat SV, Alavi K, Zeinoddini
A, Salehi M, et al. Celecoxib as an adjuvant to ﬂuvoxamine in
moderate to severe obsessive-compulsive disorder: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2015;48:
136-40.

103 Cao R, Yang X, Luo J, Wang P, Meng F, Xia M, et al. The effects of
cognitive behavioral therapy on the whole brain structural connectome
in unmedicated patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2020;104:110037.

104 Moody TD, Morﬁni F, Cheng G, Sheen C, Tadayonnejad R,
therapy
Reggente N, et al. Mechanisms of cognitive-behavioral
for obsessive-compulsive disorder involve robust and extensive
increases in brain network connectivity. Transl Psychiatry. 2017;7:
e1230.

105 Shin DJ, Jung WH, He Y, Wang J, Shim G, Byun MS, et al. The
effects of pharmacological
treatment on functional brain con-
nectome in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2014;
75:606-14.

shows widespread effects on functional brain connectivity. Neuro-
image. 2015;122:440-50.

107 Bruin WB, Taylor L, Thomas RM, Shock JP, Zhutovsky P, Abe Y,
et al. Structural neuroimaging biomarkers for obsessive-compulsive
disorder in the ENIGMA-OCD consortium: medication matters.
Transl Psychiatry. 2020;10:342.

108 de Wit SJ, van der Werf YD, Mataix-Cols D, Trujillo JP, van
Oppen P, Veltman DJ, et al. Emotion regulation before and after
transcranial magnetic stimulation in obsessive compulsive disorder.
Psychol Med. 2015;45:3059-73.

109 Eshel N, Keller CJ, Wu W, Jiang J, Mills-Finnerty C, Huemer J, et al.
Global connectivity and local excitability changes underlie anti-
depressant effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2020;45:1018-25.

110 Vink JJ, Mandija S, Petrov PI, van den Berg CA, Sommer IE,
Neggers SF. A novel concurrent TMS-fMRI method to reveal pro-
pagation patterns of prefrontal magnetic brain stimulation. Hum
Brain Mapp. 2018;39:4580-92.

111 Brunoni AR, Sampaio-Junior B, Moffa AH, Aparı´cio LV, Gordon P,
Klein I, et al. Noninvasive brain stimulation in psychiatric disorders:
a primer. Braz J Psychiatry. 2019;41:70-81.

112 Thornicroft G, Deb T, Henderson C. Community mental health care
worldwide: current status and further developments. World Psy-
chiatry. 2016;15:276-86.

113 Miller G. Mental health in developing countries. The unseen: mental

illness’s global toll. Science. 2006;311:458-61.

114 Groom MJ, Cragg L. Differential modulation of the N2 and P3 event-
related potentials by response conﬂict and inhibition. Brain Cogn.
2015;97:1-9.

115 Baumeister S, Hohmann S, Wolf I, Plichta MM, Rechtsteiner S,
inhibitory control processes assessed

Zangl M, et al. Sequential
through simultaneous EEG-fMRI. Neuroimage. 2014;94:349-59.
116 Gru¨tzmann R, Endrass T, Kaufmann C, Allen E, Eichele T, Kath-
mann N. Presupplementary motor area contributes to altered error
monitoring in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol Psychiatry.
2016;80:562-71.

117 Gratton C, Laumann TO, Nielsen AN, Greene DJ, Gordon EM,
Gilmore AW, et al. Functional brain networks are dominated by
stable group and individual factors, not cognitive or daily variation.
Neuron. 2018;98:439-52.e5.

118 Elliott ML, Knodt AR, Cooke M, Kim MJ, Melzer TR, Keenan R, et al.
General functional connectivity: shared features of resting-state and
task fMRI drive reliable and heritable individual differences in
functional brain networks. Neuroimage. 2019;189:516-32.

119 Woo CW, Chang LJ, Lindquist MA, Wager TD. Building better bio-
markers: brain models in translational neuroimaging. Nat Neurosci.
2017;20:365-77.

120 Kwak S, Kim M, Kim T, Kwak Y, Oh S, Lho SK, et al. Deﬁning data-
driven subgroups of obsessive-compulsive disorder with different
treatment responses based on resting-state functional connectivity.
Transl Psychiatry. 2020;10:359.

121 Jacobs GR, Voineskos AN, Hawco C, Stefanik L, Forde NJ,
Integration of brain and behavior measures
Dickie EW, et al.
for
identiﬁcation of data-driven groups cutting across children
with ASD, ADHD, or OCD. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2021;46:
643-53.

122 Kushki A, Anagnotou E, Hammill C, Duez P, Brian J, Iaboni A, et al.
Examining overlap and homogeneity in ASD, ADHD, and OCD: a
data-driven, diagnostic-agnostic approach. Transl Psychiatry. 2019;
9:318.

123 Simpson HB, van den Heuvel OA, Miguel EC, Reddy YC, Stein DJ,
Lewis-Ferna´ndez R, et al. Toward identifying reproducible brain
signatures of obsessive-compulsive proﬁles: rationale and methods
for a new global initiative. BMC Psychiatry. 2020;20:68.

124 Demuru M, Fraschini M. EEG ﬁngerprinting: subject-speciﬁc sig-
nature based on the aperiodic component of power spectrum.
Comput Biol Med. 2020;120:103748.

125 Gomez DE, Llera A, Marques JP, Beckmann CF, Norris DG. Single-
subject, single-session, temporal modes of brain activity. Neuro-
image. 2020;218:116783.

106 Klaassens BL, van Gorsel HC, Khalili-Mahani N, van der Grond J,
Wyman BT, Whitcher B, et al. Single-dose serotonergic stimulation

126 Salum GA, Gadelha A, Pan PM, Moriyama TS, Graeff-Martina AS,
Tamanha AC, et al. High risk cohort study for psychiatric disorders

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)

200

E Shephard et al.

in childhood: rationale, design, methods and preliminary results. Int
J Methods Psychiatr Res. 2015;24:58-73.

127 van den Heuvel MP, Sporns O. Network hubs in the human brain.

Trends Cogn Sci. 2013;17:683-96.

128 Choi EY, Tanimura Y, Vage PR, Yates EH, Haber SN. Convergence
of prefrontal and parietal anatomical projections in a connectional
hub in the striatum. Neuroimage. 2017;146:821-32.

129 Tang W, Jbabdi S, Zhu Z, Cottaar M, Grisot G, Lehman JF
et al. A connectional hub in the rostral anterior cingulate cor-
tex links areas of emotion and cognitive control. Elife. 2019;8:
e43761.

130 Tian L, Meng C, Jiang Y, Tang Q, Wang S, Xie X, et al. Abnor-
mal functional connectivity of brain network hubs associated with
symptom severity in treatment-naive patients with obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder: a resting-state functional MRI study. Prog Neu-
ropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2016;66:104-11.

131 Tomasi D, Volkow ND. Functional connectivity hubs in the human

brain. Neuroimage. 2011;57:908-17.

132 Beucke JC, Sepulcre J, Talukdar T, Linnman C, Zschenderlein K,
Endrass T, et al. Abnormally high degree connectivity of the orbi-
tofrontal cortex in obsessive-compulsive disorder. JAMA Psychiatry.
2013;70:619-29.

Braz J Psychiatry. 2022;44(2)
