# Szechtman_2017_Obsessive-compulsive disorder Insights from animal models.

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

Published in final edited form as:

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2017 May ; 76(Pt B): 254–279. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.04.019.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Insights from animal models☆

Henry Szechtmana, Susanne E. Ahmarib, Richard J. Beningerc,*, David Eilamd, Brian H. 
Harveye, Henriette Edemann-Callesenf, and Christine Winterf
aDepartment of Psychiatry and Behavioural Neurosciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, 
Canada

bDepartment of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

cDepartments of Psychology and Psychiatry, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada

dDepartment of Zoology, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv 69978, Israel

eMRC Unit on Anxiety and Stress Disorders, Center of Excellence for Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
School of Pharmacy, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa

fBereich Experimentelle Psychiatrie, Klinik und Poliklinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, 
Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus an der Technischen Universität Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany

Abstract

Research with animal models of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) shows the following: (1) 
Optogenetic studies in mice provide evidence for a plausible cause-effect relation between 
increased activity in cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical (CBGTC) circuits and OCD by 
demonstrating the induction of compulsive behavior with the experimental manipulation of the 
CBGTC circuit. (2) Parallel use of several animal models is a fruitful paradigm to examine the 
mechanisms of treatment effects of deep brain stimulation in distinct OCD endophenotypes. (3) 
Features of spontaneous behavior in deer mice constitute a rich platform to investigate the 
neurobiology of OCD, social ramifications of a compulsive phenotype, and test novel drugs. (4) 
Studies in animal models for psychiatric disorders comorbid with OCD suggest comorbidity may 
involve shared neural circuits controlling expression of compulsive behavior. (5) Analysis of 
compulsive behavior into its constitutive components provides evidence from an animal model for 
a motivational perspective on OCD. (6) Methods of behavioral analysis in an animal model 
translate to dissection of compulsive rituals in OCD patients, leading to diagnostic tests.

☆Based on a symposium with the same title (co-chairs: HS, RJB) at the International Behavioral Neuroscience Society (IBNS) 
meeting held in Victoria, BC, Canada. Each major section describes the work in the laboratories of the investigators; the sequence of 
sections in the paper is conceptual. All authors contributed equally to the writing of this paper.
*Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, 62 Arch Street, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON K7L3N6, Canada. 
beninger@queensu.ca (R.J. Beninger). 
Conflict of interests
Brian H. Harvey has participated in advisory boards and received honoraria from Servier®, and has received research funding from 
Servier® and Lundbeck®. BHH acknowledges that opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in any 
publication generated by National Research Foundation (NRF) supported research are those of the authors, and that the NRF accepts 
no liability whatsoever in this regard. Remaining authors declare no competing interests.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Keywords

Page 2

Quinpirole; Security motivation system; Animal model; Nucleus accumbens core; Obsessive-
compulsive disorder; Orbitofrontal cortex; Striatum; Basal ganglia; Deer mouse; Endophenotypes

1. Introduction

Animal models of psychiatric disorders simulate signs or symptoms of a psychiatric disorder 
to provide a preparation for testing specific etiological theories and underlying mechanisms 
of the disorder as well as for conducting preclinical drug evaluations (Eilam and Szechtman, 
2005a; Jones et al., 2011; Lazar et al., 2011; McKinney, 1988; Szechtman and Eilam, 2005; 
Willner, 1984). The use of animal models in psychiatry has had a stormy history in part 
because of the need to work out their proper place in the context of psychiatry as a scientific 
discipline (Szechtman and Eilam, 2005). One challenge often levelled at animal models is 
scepticism that the model fully replicates the clinical condition or bears relevance for the 
mechanisms of the human condition. Attempts at dealing with this challenge led to 
influential formulations of criteria to evaluate animal models in psychiatry (Abramson and 
Seligman, 1977; Belzung and Lemoine, 2011; Geyer and Markou, 1995; Hoffman, 2016b; 
McKinney and Bunney, 1969; Willner, 1984, 2005; Willner et al., 1992). While the use of 
animal models in psychiatry is accepted as proper today, it is worthwhile to reiterate briefly 
what constitutes a “model.”

A scholarly exposition regarding what a “model” is and the “tortuous” history of models in 
psychology was provided by Chapanis (1961). Of relevance to the present review using 
animal models of OCD, Chapanis (1961) pointed out that a model is “…only an analogy, a 
statement that in some ways the thing modeled behaves ‘like this’ (p. 188). Indeed, “…the 
worst error committed in the name of models is to forget that at best a model represents only 
a part – and usually only a small part – of the thing being modeled” (Chapanis, 1961 p. 126). 
The same notion had been echoed by McKinney (1988), in Models of Mental Disorders: A 
New Comparative Psychiatry, who admonished against the quest for comprehensive animal 
models of psychiatric disorders because no model can be a miniature replica of the entire 
human condition. Unfortunately, even today this crucial point is not always remembered. 
Chapanis (1961) has argued that because of their inherently limited scope, models should be 
evaluated differently from theories: “Models, in a word, are judged by criteria of usefulness; 
theories, by criteria of truthfulness” (p. 119). In other words, good models generate novel 
insights and new research. Of course, models designed to test particular theory regarding an 
aspect of the human disorder are evaluated by criteria of both usefulness and truthfulness.

This paper reviews several animal models of OCD symptoms and highlights the insights 
derived from research using those models. OCD is a severe and highly prevalent disorder 
(Koran, 2000; Murray and Lopez, 1996), with a lifetime prevalence of 1–2% (Crino et al., 
2005; Karno et al., 1988; Rasmussen and Eisen, 1991). Symptoms consist of recurrent and 
persistent thoughts (“Obsessions”) and/or repetitive, relatively stereotyped behaviors 
(“compulsions”) that the person feels compelled to think or perform but recognizes as 
irrational or excessive (Goodman et al., 1990; Leckman et al., 2010; Stein, 2002). The most 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 3

common subjective clinical features are doubt and indecision; and the two most common 
compulsive behaviors are checking (repeated redoing of actions related to security, 
orderliness, or accuracy) and washing (generally of hands but sometimes also of clothes, 
etc.) (Henderson and Pollard, 1988; Rasmussen and Eisen, 1992; Reed, 1985). In the 
following sections, some aspects of the disorder that benefited from research using an 
animal model are considered.

When modeling OCD in animals, it is difficult to assess obsessions because their detection 
depends heavily on verbal or written communications. Compulsions, on the other hand, are 
manifested behaviourally and therefore observable in animal models. As a result, all of the 
animal models discussed in this review are putative models of compulsive behavior 
involving repetitive actions and often focusing on the structure of those actions. Results 
provide convergent insights into brain circuits and neurotransmitters involved in the overt, 
behavioral component of OCD.

Importantly, the review does not provide an exhaustive summary of the growing area of 
research using animal models of OCD, as a number of such first-rate publications exists 
(Ahmari, 2015; Ahmari and Dougherty, 2015; Albelda and Joel, 2012a, 2012b; Alonso et al., 
2015; Boulougouris et al., 2009; Camilla d’Angelo et al., 2014; Diniz et al., 2012; Eilam and 
Szechtman, 2005b; Eilam et al., 2012; Grados et al., 2015; Gunaydin and Kreitzer, 2016; 
Hoffman, 2011, 2016a; Joel, 2006a; Korff and Harvey, 2006; Man et al., 2004; Ting and 
Feng, 2011b; Wang et al., 2009; Westenberg et al., 2007). Instead, the current synthesis is 
unique by bringing together several independent investigators who highlight a piece of their 
research where animal models served as the source and exemplars of fruitful questions and 
areas of investigation into OCD.

The usual emphasis in translational research of psychiatric disorders is to consider clinical 
studies as primary, directing animal model research in the laboratory. However, there is 
another equally important and invaluable property of animal models in psychiatry—using 
animal models to generate novel findings and hypotheses about the disorder that should be 
examined in the clinic. The 5 sections which follow each highlights how studies using 
different animal models of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) generated some novel 
insights into this disorder. In so doing, the review acknowledges the value of animal work in 
directing research on OCD and encourages pursuit of theory-driven behavioral neuroscience 
research on this disorder.

2. Insights into OCD from optogenetics in mice: using new technologies to 

build bridges between mice and humans

Treatment options for OCD are still limited. To develop new, more effective treatments, a 
better understanding of the underlying pathophysiology is required. Many current models 
center on the idea that disruption of CBGTC circuit activity may directly lead to obsessions 
and/or compulsions in OCD patients (Maia et al., 2008; Rauch et al., 1997; Rotge et al., 
2010; Saxena et al., 2001). However, this inference is based on very strong correlative 
evidence from functional imaging studies in patients with OCD. Animal models provide an 
essential resource for testing whether indeed abnormal activity in CBGTC circuits leads to 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 4

OCD symptoms, such as abnormal repetitive behaviors. In particular, mouse models can be 
combined with optogenetic and chemogenetic tools that permit precise control over activity 
in specified neural circuits, allowing the direct determination of the relationship between 
activity in a particular neural circuit and behavioral changes relevant to OCD. Here we 
highlight how use of optogenetic technology in mice made it possible to begin to simulate 
neuroimaging findings from OCD patients and directly determine if hyperactivity 
originating in a specific CBGTC circuit node leads to abnormal behaviors relevant to OCD.

2.1. CBGTC circuits in OCD

Several key areas of research suggest that dysregulation in CBGTC circuits may lead to 
OCD symptoms in humans. First, some of the earliest work supporting this theory arises 
from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and positron emission tomography 
studies which examined metabolic activity in OCD patients, both at baseline and when OCD 
symptoms were provoked in the scanner (Mataix-Cols et al., 2004; Rauch et al., 1997; Rotge 
et al., 2008). These studies showed hyperactivity in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), anterior 
cingulate cortex (ACC), caudate (particularly the head), and anterior thalamus, with OFC 
showing the most robust activation during symptom provocation. Recent studies 
emphasizing resting state connectivity using both seed-based and graph-theory based 
approaches have demonstrated abnormal functional connectivity in OFC (Beucke et al., 
2013; Harrison et al., 2013., 2009; Posner et al., 2014), ACC (Anticevic et al., 2014; Posner 
et al., 2014), ventral (Anticevic et al., 2014; Harrison et al., 2013, 2009; Posner et al., 2014) 
and dorsal striatum (Anticevic et al., 2014; Harrison et al., 2009), putamen (Anticevic et al., 
2014; Beucke et al., 2013), and anterior thalamus (Anticevic et al., 2014). Abe et al. (2015) 
found increased directional connectivity between OFC and ventral striatum using resting 
state fMRI and Granger causality analysis. Second, structural magnetic resonance imaging 
studies in OCD patients have generally demonstrated volume changes in key CBGTC circuit 
hubs, including OFC, ACC, and striatum (de Wit et al., 2014; Pittenger et al., 2011; Rodman 
et al., 2012). Though two meta-analyses (Radua and Mataix-Cols, 2009; Rotge et al., 2009) 
and a recent mega-analysis (de Wit et al., 2014) highlight the fact that directionality of 
findings varies across structural imaging studies, particularly in the striatum, these 
discrepancies can likely be accounted for by factors including methodological differences 
(e.g., region of interest vs. whole-brain voxel-based morphometry) and heterogeneity of 
patient populations (e.g., age, comorbidity, medication status, symptom dimensions). 
Finally, a last category of studies has examined regional activity during cognitive activation 
in an attempt to unmask functional abnormalities that may not be present at baseline. 
Findings have included decreased OFC activation during Go/NoGo tasks (measuring 
inhibitory control) (Page et al., 2009; Roth et al., 2007), increased frontostriatal activation 
during the Simon task (measuring cognitive control and conflict resolution) (Marsh et al., 
2009), and decreased lateral OFC activation during reversal learning (Chamberlain et al., 
2008). Though it remains to be determined how these task-related alterations in activity are 
related to OCD symptoms, overall, these findings suggest that: 1) altered structure and 
function in CBGTC circuits is a key feature of OCD, and 2) these alterations may contribute 
to symptom generation.

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 5

2.2. Optogenetic activation within CBGTC circuits in mice produces increased grooming

Based on this convergence of evidence, Ahmari et al. (2013) used optogenetic technology to 
produce hyperactivity in the OFC-ventromedial striatum (VMS) pathway in mice and 
assessed OCD-related behaviors. Mice were first infected with a virus [adenovirus-
associated vector (AAV)] encoding a light-activated excitatory ion channel, 
channelrhodopsin (ChR2), via injection of AAV-diO-ChR2-EYFP (Tsai et al., 2009) in 
medial OFC of EMX-Cre mice (Gorski et al., 2002). This manipulation led to specific 
expression of both ChR2 and an enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) visualization 
tag in excitatory OFC projection neurons. They next used combined optogenetic stimulation 
of VMS terminals (473 nm light: 10 Hz, 10 ms, 10 mW) and in vivo electrophysiological 
recording at the same site to determine that these OFC-VMS projections could be selectively 
and robustly activated. This system made it possible to test the primary hypothesis: OFC-
VMS hyper-stimulation will lead to an acute increase in OCD-relevant behaviors; 
perseverative grooming was tested based on previous transgenic studies highlighting the 
potential relevance of this behavior to OCD (Bienvenu et al., 2009; Ting and Feng, 2011a; 
Welch et al., 2007; Zuchner et al., 2009). Surprisingly, acute stimulation instead triggered 
increased locomotion, which immediately ceased when the light was turned off. However, 
repeated hyper-activation of the OFC-VMS projections via 5 min of daily ChR2-based 
stimulation over the course of 5–7 days led to a progressive increase in perseverative 
grooming that was observed both 1 h and 24 h after stimulation; the behavioral changes were 
therefore not directly time-locked to ChR2 activation. The increased perseverative grooming 
was correlated with an increase in the evoked firing rate at OFC-VMS synapses, suggesting 
that pathologic plasticity might be responsible for the generation of the observed behavioral 
changes. The increased grooming persisted for at least 2 weeks after complete cessation of 
stimulation (though levels decayed over time), demonstrating that repetitive grooming, once 
established, could persist without further direct circuit hyper-activation. This again 
suggested a link between circuit plasticity and the development of abnormal grooming 
behavior. Finally, both the behavioral and plasticity changes were reversed by treatment with 
chronic, but not acute, high-dose of the 5-HT-selective reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) fluoxetine, 
a regimen that is effective in reducing symptoms in a subset of OCD patients.

2.3. Insights from the results of optogenetic studies in mice: potential involvement of 
plasticity mechanisms

Optogenetic approaches in mice provide several insights that may help us understand 
pathologic changes underlying the development of maladaptive repetitive behaviors in OCD 
patients. First, Ahmari et al. (2013) demonstrated for the first time that hyper-activation of 
circuits linked to OCD in humans can lead, over time, to the development of abnormal 
repetitive grooming behavior in wild-type, healthy mice. Potential relevance of this 
phenotype to OCD in humans is supplied by the observation of pathologic grooming 
behavior in transgenic OCD mouse models that have been linked back to human OCD 
through genetic studies (Bienvenu et al., 2009; Ting and Feng, 2011a; Zuchner et al., 2009). 
Second, chronic, but not acute, treatment with high-dose fluoxetine, which parallels the time 
course and drug levels used in human OCD patients, leads to reversal of both the abnormal 
repetitive grooming behavior and the associated putative plasticity changes. Although many 
OCD patients have only a partial response to fluoxetine, these findings may provide insight 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 6

into pathophysiologic processes in the subset of OCD patients who do have robust 
pharmacologic responses, and potentially lead to clues regarding how to improve treatment 
response to SSRIs in this disorder. Overall, being able to use advanced neuroscience 
techniques to directly test causality is one of the unique advantages of rodent model systems 
over human studies.

This series of experiments also offered surprising insights into the potential involvement of 
plasticity mechanisms in the development of abnormal repetitive behaviors relevant to OCD. 
Ahmari et al. (2013) initially predicted that hyper-activation of OFC-VMS circuits would 
directly lead to abnormal grooming behavior, but contrary to this expectation, repeated 
abnormal stimulation was required for pathologic behaviors to evolve (Fig. 1). Surprisingly, 
only 5 min of stimulation a day was necessary, although repetition of this relatively small but 
disruptive intervention was required for behavioral change. It remains to be seen whether 
similarly brief but repeated alterations in neural activity could also lead to the development 
of pathologic plasticity and symptoms in humans. The findings from this study could 
provide a rationale for investigating whether evidence for similar mechanisms exists in OCD 
patients.

Also surprising was the fact that abnormal activity was not directly time-locked to the 
evolution of abnormal repetitive grooming. Although it is clear that ChR2-mediated 
stimulation of OFC-VMS circuits was required for the development of abnormal behavior 
since matched controls did not display the phenotype, the behavioral changes were observed 
at time points removed from the acute stimulation paradigm. As discussed above, this is 
highly suggestive that the evolution of abnormal repetitive behaviors is linked to plasticity 
originating at OFC-VMS synapses. However, even though it is known that the OFC-VMS 
node displays electrophysiological changes that parallel the observed behavioral changes, it 
is possible that the actual causative event(s) may be localized at a downstream node of the 
CBGTC network (such as the ventral pallidum or anterior thalamus). Alternatively, the key 
source of dysfunction may lie in the interaction between plasticity at OFC-VMS synapses 
and activity alterations within the extended connected neural network, either within or 
outside of CBGTC circuits. Ongoing experiments in rodents are investigating these 
questions by combining precise in vivo neural manipulations with sophisticated 
observational approaches, such as multi-site electrophysiology and in vivo imaging. Further 
studies will be able to directly assess the effects of optogenetic stimulation at a single site on 
activity in the entire extended neural network, and identify the key network of nodes 
responsible for the observed behavioral changes.

2.4. Summary and conclusions

In summary, experiments in animals can be an extremely useful complement to human 
studies for the investigation of neural mechanisms underlying development of pathology 
relevant to neuropsychiatric illness. To this point, it is very important to recognize that 
optogenetic stimulation of OFC-VMS projections, as described above, does not yield an 
OCD model. Simply put, through these experiments an optogenetic mouse model of OCD 
was not created. Rather, the strength of this approach lies in the ability to directly test 
hypotheses regarding whether circuit dysfunction observed via neuroimaging methods in the 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 7

psychiatric illness under study can either directly or indirectly lead to OCD-like behaviors 
and/or changes in neural substrates. Results highlight this fact by demonstrating that 
repeated OFC-VMS stimulation leads to perseverative grooming behavior, as discussed here, 
but does not lead to alterations in either anxiety-related behaviors or prepulse inhibition, two 
phenotypic changes that might be expected in an ‘OCD mouse model’ (Ahmari et al., 2013). 
In fact, this approach could be used as a template for dissecting circuit components 
underlying specific symptoms within a particular disorder, as seen in examination of the 
diverse features of anxiety by Kim et al. (2013). Thus, animal models can be highly 
informative, since they provide a valuable tool for: 1) determining how activity disruptions 
in specific circuits can lead to OCD-like behaviors; and, 2) uncovering the basic molecular 
and cellular mechanisms underlying translation of abnormal CBGTC circuit activity into 
abnormal repetitive behaviors. It is important to simultaneously recognize the limitations of 
animal models and to frame interpretations of the data accordingly.

3. Insights into OCD from animal models of enhanced schedule-induced 

polydipsia

3.1. The SIP paradigm

Schedule-induced polydipsia (SIP) is a ritualized act that neither serves an obvious 
physiological need nor the overall goal of obtaining food, and can lead to functional 
impairments associated with excessive fluid intake. SIP therefore has several features of the 
compulsions observed in OCD and related illnesses. As suggested by Moreno and Flores 
(2012), consideration of the variables affecting SIP and the neurocircuitry underlying this 
maladaptive behavior may provide novel insights into OCD.

John Falk first reported SIP in 1961. He trained food-restricted rats to lever press on a 
variable interval (VI) 1-min schedule in daily 190-min sessions. According to this schedule, 
food (a 45 mg food pellet) availability is programmed at variable times during the session; in 
Falk’s study, the time from one pellet to the next varied from 3 s to 2 min but averaged 1 
min. Food delivery depends on a lever press. Thus, the animals have to lever press for food 
but cannot predict when a lever press will produce food although average food availability is 
at a frequency of one pellet per min. As originally described by Skinner (1938), the rats in 
Falk’s study lever pressed at a fairly constant rate throughout the session; for example, one 
rat pressed at a rate averaging about one response every 5 s throughout the entire session 
(Falk, 1961). The novel feature in Falk’s study was the mounting of a water-filled drinking 
tube outfitted with a drinkometer that monitored licks inside the lever-pressing chamber. He 
observed that shortly after each pellet delivery, the rats frequently drank. This drinking 
behavior often lasted so long that pellets made available at short intervals were not earned as 
rapidly as possible. Most interestingly, drinking was excessive and far beyond physiological 
need. Rats drank on average more than three times their normal daily fluid intake during the 
190-min lever-pressing session. Control rats that received the same number of pellets all at 
once in a dish and were observed to eat those pellets did not show excessive drinking.

SIP has been observed in several species including humans and with different reinforcers. 
Instead of SIP, schedule-induced aggression, escape, wheel-running, gnawing and pica 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 8

(eating of non-food objects, e.g., wooden shavings) has been observed when appropriate 
stimuli are available to the animal (Falk, 1971). These behaviors including SIP have been 
termed “adjunctive” because they are added to feeding but not essential to it. The generation 
of SIP depends on the level of food restriction, SIP being less intense or absent in less food-
restricted animals. It is not necessary to require an operant response of the animal in order to 
observe SIP; Falk (1969) showed that presenting response-independent food pellets at the 
same inter-pellet intervals that were used in the VI 1-min schedule described above led to 
the same level of SIP as that observed when a response was required. Fixed-time (FT) 
schedules of response-independent food presentations produce optimal SIP when the inter-
pellet interval is 60 s (see Moreno and Flores, 2012).

3.2. SIP as a compulsive behavior

If SIP is a good animal model of compulsive symptoms of OCD and related disorders, 
pharmacological agents that are effective in treating OCD would be expected to reduce SIP. 
In general they do. Thus, SIP is reduced by DA receptor antagonist drugs including typical 
(e.g., haloperidol) and atypical antipsychotics (e.g., clozapine) and by serotonergic drugs 
including chronic SSRIs (e.g., fluoxetine, clomipramine), a 5-HT1A antagonist and 5-HT2C 
agonists (reviewed by Moreno and Flores, 2012). As discussed in Section 2, CBGTC circuits 
have been implicated in OCD (Chamberlain et al., 2008; Menzies et al., 2008). Brain 
structures implicated in SIP include the prefrontal cortex (PFC), hippocampus and NAc. 
Lesions placed in these structures reduce the development of SIP. Hypothalamic-pituitary 
axis changes are also implicated in OCD and SIP. Reduced levels of plasma corticosterone 
and increased levels of prolactin are observed in animals showing SIP and blockade of 
corticosterone synthesis reduces SIP (reviewed by Moreno and Flores, 2012). Results may 
reveal some overlap of the neural mechanisms of OCD and SIP. The SIP model appears to 
have face validity as a compulsive behavior and possibly construct validity based on the 
involvement of prefrontal cortical and striatal structures in OCD and SIP. However, the 
homology of frontal cortical regions in humans and rats remains a topic of discussion.

Compulsive drinking characterized by fluid consumption that exceeds homeostatic need has 
been observed in OCD and is comorbid in a subpopulation (about 20%) of patients with 
other disorders, the largest proportion being those with chronic schizophrenia (de Leon et 
al., 1994). A number of animal models of schizophrenia symptoms have been introduced in 
recent years (reviewed by Jones et al., 2011) raising the question of whether these models 
will show greater polydipsia than control animals. Results of empirical studies with three of 
these models suggest that they do.

3.2.1. Animal models of polydipsia—Before discussing polydipsia in animal models of 
enhanced SIP, it should be noted that increased drinking has been observed in other animal 
models of OCD. Rowland et al. (1981) used an amphetamine-sensitization procedure with 
rats and assessed their water intake each day in the 5 h following injection. They observed 
increased, apparently non-regulatory drinking over days. Similar effects have been observed 
with the DA D2/D3 receptor agonist quinpirole (QNP) (Amato et al., 2007, 2008; Fraioli et 
al., 1997). Excessive drinking was blocked by haloperidol or clomipramine, agents used to 
treat OCD (Amato et al., 2008). In this model, polydipsia is only seen in non-water-

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 9

restricted animals; water-restricted animals instead show decreased drinking following 
repeated injections of amphetamine or QNP (Milella et al., 2008; Stolerman and D’Mello, 
1978). A further twist on this paradigm is the observation that QNP increases what has been 
termed “contrafreeloading”; mildly water-restricted rats given simultaneous access to a lever 
that can be pressed for water reward and a water bottle from which water can be freely drunk 
were observed with daily injections of QNP to progressively lever press more for water and 
to drink less from the water bottle (Amato et al., 2007; Cioli et al., 2000; De Carolis et al., 
2011; Schepisi et al., 2013). This apparently compulsive-like, non-regulatory behavior was 
reversed by clomipramine (De Carolis et al., 2011). An examination of the relationship of 
non-regulatory drinking and lever-pressing in these models to polydipsia in the SIP model 
awaits further study.

3.3. Animal models of enhanced SIP

Sub-chronic treatment with an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-blocking drug 
(Jentsch et al., 1997) leads to enhanced SIP. Sub-chronic NMDA receptor blockade is 
produced by twice-daily injections of an NMDA receptor blocker such as phencyclidine or 
MK-801, often for a period of 7 days. Sub-chronically treated animals showed an enhanced 
response to amphetamine when tested a week after the end of injections (Jentsch et al., 
1998) and changes in markers for γ-amino butyric acid (GABA) neurotransmission 
(Schroeder et al., 2000) respectively mimicking elevated DA function (Abi-Dargham et al., 
2000) and possibly decreased GABA function seen in schizophrenia (Costa et al., 2004). 
Hawken and colleagues (2011) used this model to compare treated and control animals in 
the SIP paradigm. Results showed significantly elevated SIP in rats that had been sub-
chronically treated with the NMDA receptor blocker MK-801 (see Fig. 2). This observation 
extends the face validity of the sub-chronic NMDA receptor-blockade model to include 
increased susceptibility to compulsive behaviors such as polydipsia.

Another model that showed enhanced SIP is post-weaning social isolation. Rats are housed 
singly in clear Plexiglas cages in a colony room where they can see, hear and smell 
conspecifics but they do not have physical contact with them from the age of weaning 
(postnatal day 21) until the end of testing with testing beginning after at least 5 weeks of 
social isolation. Post-weaning socially isolated animals show impaired sensorimotor gating, 
social withdrawal, impaired cognitive flexibility and increased activity in a novel 
environment (Powell and Miyakawa, 2006; Simpson et al., 2010), mimicking some of the 
positive, negative and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia. Changes in markers for GABA 
function are also seen in the social isolation model and in schizophrenia (Hickey et al., 
2012). Social isolation rearing in rats presents with increased oxidative stress as well as 
immune-inflammatory dysregulation (Moller et al., 2011, 2013), both of which are evident 
in schizophrenia, and these changes can be reversed with clozapine or N-acetylcysteine, an 
antioxidant (Moller et al., 2013). This links with oxidative stress in OCD, as well as the 
response of OCD to N-acetylcysteine (see Section 4). Moreover, disordered redox is also 
noted in the deer mouse model of OCD (Section 4). Animals socially isolated for an 
equivalent period in adulthood do not show these behavioral changes (Geyer and 
Moghaddam, 2002). When post-weaning socially isolated rats were tested for SIP, 
significantly more drinking was seen compared to age-matched group-housed rats (Hawken 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 10

et al., 2013). Results show that behaviors observed in the social isolation model extend to 
increased susceptibility to a compulsive action.

Amphetamine-sensitized rats show increased drinking in the SIP paradigm. This model 
involves daily injections of amphetamine, e.g., 1.5 mg/kg per day for 5 consecutive days, 
followed by a washout period, e.g., 28 days. These animals show a chronic state of elevated 
dopaminergic function (Lodge and Grace, 2012) and neurocognitive deficits that model 
some of those seen in schizophrenia (Castner et al., 2004). Hawken and Beninger (2014) 
showed that amphetamine-sensitized rats tested in the SIP paradigm involving intermittent 
presentations of food pellets as described above drank significantly more than saline-treated 
controls or controls fed all of the pellets in a dish. The amphetamine-sensitized rats were 
given one additional test day following 23 days of SIP testing. On this day, all animals were 
given all of their food pellets in a dish instead of intermittently throughout the session. The 
amphetamine-sensitized group drank significantly more than the saline group. This result 
suggests that compulsive drinking had become conditioned to cues associated with SIP and 
may be related to the finding of Ahmari et al. (2013) that mice that had undergone repeated 
optogenetic activation of OFC-VMS projection neurons showed grooming even 24 h after 
stimulation. These results with the amphetamine sensitization model are consistent with 
those from studies using the sub-chronic NMDA receptor blockade or post-weaning social 
isolation models in showing increased susceptibility to compulsive behavior.

3.4. Striatal vs. hippocampal phenotypes

Rats show phenotypic differences in their susceptibility to SIP. Such phenotypic 
heterogeneity has also been noted in the deer mouse model described in Section 4 (Korff et 
al., 2008) and may reflect differences in brain circuitry that may be linked specifically to SIP 
susceptibility and more generally to susceptibility to compulsive behavior and OCD.

Behavioral tasks can be used to identify individual differences in rats and to relate those 
differences to particular brain circuits. A simple choice task has been used in rats to identify 
response strategies that are thought to reflect differential reliance on striatal versus 
hippocampal circuitry. Food-restricted rats were trained in a Y-maze discrimination task 
where rats always started in one arm and found food in a goal arm that never varied (see Fig. 
3, Training). On periodic probe trials, they were started in the third arm that was neither the 
usual start box nor the goal box (Fig. 3, Testing). Rats that chose the goal arm were 
identified as relying more on their hippocampus and rats that chose the former start arm 
were identified as relying more on their striatum (Fig. 3, Two choices); one of the functions 
of the hippocampus is learning the position of things in space (place learning) and one of the 
functions of the striatum is learning stimulus-response associations (habit learning). Rats 
that chose the goal arm are putatively relying on hippocampal learning. Rats that chose the 
former start arm are putatively relying on the striatum, i.e., if they normally turned right in 
the start arm and then used the turn-right-at-the-choice-point (stimulus-response or habit) 
strategy in the probe test they would enter the former start arm (see Packard and McGaugh, 
1996).

Gregory et al. (2015) tested rats for response strategy using the Y-maze task and then tested 
them in the SIP paradigm. They found that significantly more rats that developed SIP were 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 11

those with a habit strategy while more rats that failed to develop SIP had a place strategy. 
The amphetamine-sensitized and saline control rats from the study by Hawken and Beninger 
(2014) discussed above were also evaluated for response strategy in the Y-maze before being 
tested for SIP. Half of the saline control rats used a habit (response) strategy and half used a 
place strategy. On the other hand, significantly more of the amphetamine-sensitized rats used 
a habit strategy suggesting that amphetamine sensitization led to a shift towards a habit 
strategy (Fig. 4). These results reveal that groups of rats that show a greater level of SIP are 
overrepresented by rats that use a habit strategy.

3.5. Brain structures associated with SIP

Gregory et al. (2015) tested additional rats for SIP and then sacrificed them 90 min after the 
final session. Their brains were processed for FosB/ΔFosB immunohistochemistry, a marker 
for neuronal activation. Results revealed greater activity in the mPFC and the OFC of the 
rats that showed SIP compared to those that did not. Pellon et al. (2011) similarly found 
greater c-Fos activity in the mPFC of high-drinking SIP rats. Frontocortical regions have 
been implicated in the formation of habits and compulsions (Chamberlain et al., 2008; 
Menzies et al., 2008). Differences in DA receptor binding also have been identified between 
high- and low-SIP rats. High-SIP rats show higher binding for D2 receptors and lower 
binding for D1 receptors than low-SIP rats in the NAc, mPFC, amygdala and ventral 
tegmental area (Pellon et al., 2011). Results differentially implicate DA in high- versus low-
SIP rats. Electro-physiological studies have identified differences in the firing of bed nucleus 
of the stria terminalis (BNST) neurons between SIP and non-SIP rats (Welkenhuysen et al., 
2013). Unpublished studies from the laboratory of Eric Dumont at Queen’s (personal 
communication) have also identified differences in GABA-produced inhibitory postsynaptic 
currents in the oval nucleus of the BNST of SIP versus non-SIP rats possibly implicating this 
area in the control of compulsive behavior.

The brain has multiple memory systems that may compete for the control of behavior 
(McDonald and White, 1993). For example, the hippocampus and striatum are respectively 
associated with declarative and non-declarative (e.g., habit) memory (Squire, 2004). When 
hippocampal function is compromised, as it appears to be in patients with psychogenic 
polydipsia (Goldman, 2009; Umbricht, 1994), striatal circuits may dominate in the control of 
behavior. The animal studies discussed above show that a significantly larger proportion of 
rats showing SIP use striatal response strategies in the Y-maze test. Amphetamine 
sensitization leads to a shift towards more animals with a striatal response strategy and more 
animals that show SIP. Results are consistent with reduced hippocampal function in 
polydipsia patients and greater control of behavior by striatal circuits. Imaging researchers 
have identified activity in CBGTC circuits in OCD (Chamberlain et al., 2008; Menzies et al., 
2008) and Ahmari et al. (2013) showed that opto-genetically induced over-activity in the 
OFC-VMS component of this circuit leads to compulsive behavior in mice (Section 2); the 
suggestion that animals showing SIP rely more heavily on striatal response strategies is 
consistent with these findings. The observation from FosB/ΔFosB studies of greater activity 
in the mPFC and OFC in animals showing high SIP supports a role for OFC-striatal circuits 
in compulsive behavior. Changes in striatal DA receptor subtypes further implicate this 
circuit.

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

3.6. Conclusions

Page 12

Animal models can provide insights into the brain mechanisms of human disorders such as 
OCD. By investigating SIP, excessive, non-regulatory drinking that resembles compulsive 
behaviors observed in humans, in animal models it is possible to identify brain regions and 
circuits that may be involved. Future studies will be able to use these models to identify 
further details of the brain mechanisms underlying compulsive behavior and new and more 
effective therapeutics for treating OCD and related disorders.

4. Insights into OCD from the deer mouse: a platform for research in 

neurobiology, behavior and drug discovery

4.1. Spontaneous stereotypy in the deer mouse

As a naturalistic animal model of OCD, deer mice exhibit two topographies of stereotypy, 
viz. pattern running and vertical stereotypies (backward somersaulting, repetitive jumping) 
(Hadley et al., 2006; Korff et al., 2008). The perseverative and seemingly goalless quality of 
such stereotypy, and that it develops spontaneously, provides face validity for OCD 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Heterogeneous distribution within a population 
of animals (see Fig. 5) (Korff et al., 2008) suggests a genetic association akin to OCD 
(Lochner et al., 2015). While the prevalence of OCD is markedly lower than that of high 
stereotypic (H) animals in a deer mouse population (45%, Fig. 5), what is important is that H 
stereotypy is naturally expressed in these animals and requires no pharmacological, gene 
knock-in or knock-out or other means of induction. It therefore implies a genetic basis to its 
development and possible conservation across generations. This provides a platform for gene 
association studies of relevance for modeling OCD genetics. In order to consolidate this trait 
for accurate behavioral and biological analysis, a new method of analysis replaces the HSB, 
LSB, NS classification described in Fig. 5 with H and non-stereotypic (N) animals (see 
Wolmarans et al., 2013) by considering severity of stereotypy and time spent executing such 
behaviors. This method of scoring increases the density of truly H animals, and excludes a 
non-specific “grey area” of stereotypy that presents with more N-related qualities, thereby 
reinforcing the potential value of H vs. N animals in genetic studies of OCD.

As in OCD (Fineberg and Craig, 2007), these behaviors are inhibited by chronic but not sub-
chronic high dose SSRIs (Korff et al., 2008; Wolmarans et al., 2013), while also failing to 
respond to a noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor (NRI) (e.g., desipramine) (see Fig. 6) (Korff et 
al., 2008). Environmental enrichment partially suppresses the expression of stereotypy, also 
prompting delayed presentation (Hadley et al., 2006; Powell et al., 1999), indicating that 
confinement stress is more a triggering factor than an etiological determinant, and since 
compulsions can be distinguished from rigid motor patterns on the basis of thoughtfulness 
(Eilam et al., 2006), deer mouse stereotypy can be regarded as flexible. Also deer mouse 
stereotypy appears to be associated with social deficits, is independent of anxiety and 
presents with symptom heterogeneity with regard to other forms of compulsive-like behavior 
that has value for studying the obsessive-compulsive interface of OCD (Section 4.3; 
Wolmarans et al., 2016a,b,c). As in OCD (Evans et al., 2004; Husted et al., 2006; Markarian 
et al., 2010) and as emphasized in the earlier two models (Sections 2 and 3), high stereotypic 
(H) deer mice also present with frontal cortical pathology, e.g., disordered redox balance 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 13

(Guldenpfennig et al., 2011) and altered cyclic adenosine-monophosphate (cAMP)-
phosphodiesterase (PDE) signaling (Korff et al., 2009). Finally, the 5-HT transporter (SERT) 
is the primary target for SSRI’s, while decreased SERT density in OCD (Atmaca et al., 
2011; Matsumoto et al., 2010) is associated with increased symptom severity (Hesse et al., 
2005; Reimold et al., 2007; Zitterl et al., 2008). H deer mice demonstrate decreased striatal 
but not frontal cortical SERT density (Wolmarans et al., 2013). Deer mouse stereotypy is 
therefore a useful preparation to extend our knowledge of the phenomenology, genetics, and 
biological basis of OCD, and its response to treatment. Valuable insights into OCD have 
been obtained that would have been difficult to obtain from human studies.

4.2. Relating neurochemistry to treatment response

4.2.1. The question of serotonin involvement—The model has attempted to shed 
light on the selective response of OCD to SSRI treatment and not noradrenergic or 
dopaminergic agents. Striatal concentrations of 5-HT, DA and their associated metabolites 
do not differ as a function of stereotypy, nor is stereotypy related to altered striatal D1 and 
D2 receptor density (Powell et al., 1999). Thus although deer mouse stereotypy is associated 
with SERT changes (Wolmarans et al., 2013) as well as selective response to an SSRI and 
not an NRI (Korff et al., 2008), a disturbance in serotonin may not be the immediate cause 
for excessive stereotypy in these animals. In fact, SSRI-resistant OCD often responds better 
to augmentation with a D2 receptor antagonist, such as risperidone (Erzegovesi et al., 2005; 
Fineberg et al., 2006), suggesting cooperation between serotonin and other monoamines or 
with other signaling pathways such as glutamate. Considering the paradox that deer mouse 
stereotypy (Korff et al., 2008) and human OCD (Fineberg et al., 2006) are reversed by a D2 
receptor agonist and antagonist, respectively, this highlights the complex nature of treatment 
response and suggests a mutual role for receptor state and neurotransmitter release in 
response to a dopaminergic agent. Furthermore, the role of neuronal adaptation in disease re-
affirms the importance of using a pathological animal model in drug discovery research as 
this may provide a better understanding of treatment variability and treatment resistance in 
OCD (see Section 4.2.2). Considering that DA transmission appears to be unaltered in H 
mice (Powell et al., 1999) prompts a deeper look at other mechanisms that may be involved. 
Similarly, failure to engage a deeper mechanism also explains the partial response to SSRI’s.

One such mechanism may involve oxidative stress, evidence of which has been described in 
OCD (Behl et al., 2010; Chakraborty et al., 2009; Selek et al., 2008). OCD is associated with 
polymorphisms of the neuronal glutamate transporter (EAAC1) gene, which mediates 
cysteine uptake necessary for neuronal glutathione (GSH) production (Aoyama et al., 2006; 
Monteiro and Feng, 2016). Addon N-acetyl cysteine (NAC), a GSH precursor, has distinct 
clinical benefits in OCD (Afshar et al., 2012; Paydary et al., 2016). Importantly, disturbances 
in frontal cortical reduced (GSH) and oxidized (GSSG) glutathione are correlated with 
severity of stereotypy in deer mice (see Fig. 7) (Guldenpfennig et al., 2011), suggesting 
increased cycling and utilization of GSH and confirming a causal association between 
oxidative stress and symptom severity in deer mice and possibly in OCD. Moreover, the 
aforementioned clinical benefit of NAC in OCD and also its ability to target glutamate 
transmission (Berk et al., 2013) reinforces current thinking as to the clinical value of 
glutamate modulators in treating OCD (Grados et al., 2013; Pittenger et al., 2006).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 14

4.2.2. How a naturalistic model reveals more about OCD neurocircuitry—OCD 
represents a bias in the direct vs. indirect basal ganglia pathway within the CBGTC circuit, 
with separation of these pathways mediated through D1 and D2 receptors as well as 
serotonergic regulation of striatal DA activity via the raphae nucleus (Korff and Harvey, 
2006). Despite this knowledge, uncertainty prevails as to how DA and 5-HT are co-involved 
in OCD, especially from a neurotherapeutics point of view. Thus, although D2 receptor 
antagonists benefit treatment, a number of studies have failed to demonstrate a hyper-
dopaminergic state in OCD (Brambilla et al., 2000; Pitchot et al., 1996). Further, although 
direct and indirect acting DA agonists exacerbate obsessive-compulsive (OC) symptoms, 
they may also improve such symptoms (Denys et al., 2004). Concerning 5-HT, despite the 
clinical efficacy of SSRI’s, broad-spectrum 5-HT agonists may exacerbate OCD symptoms 
(Hollander et al., 1991) or not (Khanna et al., 2001). Similarly, paradoxical data are 
observed with 5HT1D agonists, while 5HT1A and 5HT2C receptor agonists have no effect on 
OC symptom severity (Aouizerate et al., 2005). Different 5-HT receptors are probably 
involved in different OCD behaviors, e.g., 5HT2C receptors in reward-seeking behavior 
(Millan et al., 1998), and it is therefore incumbent to delineate the sub-cellular pathways 
involved to assist in the drug discovery endeavor. A model that presents with behavioral 
heterogeneity (see later in this section and Section 6) would be invaluable in acquiring a 
deeper understanding of OCD and its treatment.

Although DA is not altered in the CBGTC of deer mice (Guldenpfennig et al., 2011; Powell 
et al., 1999), deer mouse stereotypy is abrogated by the D2/3 agonist QNP (Korff et al., 
2008), thus also paradoxical. That QNP induces ‘compulsive checking’ in rats (Szechtman et 
al., 1998a) suggests that DA agonists precipitate OC-like behavior in a non-pathological 
(drug-induced) animal model but suppress such behaviors in naturalistic models, e.g., deer 
mice, bank voles (Korff et al., 2008; Vandebroek and Odberg, 1997). DA pathology likely 
already exists in a naturalistic (pathological) animal model but is absent in an acute drug-
induced model. The basis for subversive dopaminergic function in deer mice, such as DA-
mediated changes in redox balance noted earlier, is a primer for deeper translational 
research.

The non-selective 5HT1A/2A/2B/2C agonist, m-chlorophenylpiperazine, attenuates deer mouse 
stereotypy (Korff et al., 2008), as well as suppresses QNP-induced checking in rats (Tucci et 
al., 2013, 2015). Perseverative locomotor paths are indeed associated with 5HT1B/1D 
receptor stimulation (Shanahan et al., 2011). More importantly, 5HT1A receptor 
desensitization involves adenylate cyclase-cAMP signaling (Hensler et al., 1996), while the 
ameliorative effects of SSRIs in OCD are said to involve desensitization of these receptors 
(El Mansari and Blier, 2006; Pineyro and Blier, 1999). Severity of stereotypy in deer mice is 
associated with elevated frontal-cortical (not striatal) cAMP and reduced PDE4 activity, 
while chronic fluoxetine significantly reduces both stereotypy and cortical (but not striatal) 
cAMP and PDE4 activity in H animals (see Fig. 8) (Korff et al., 2009). Such concordance 
between predictive and construct validity is especially significant. 5HT1A agonists reduce 
stereotypy (Korff et al., 2008; Tucci et al., 2013, 2014b), while 5-HT1A receptor activation 
promotes adenylyl cyclase sensitization (Hensler et al., 1996), supporting a role for 5HT1A/B 
Gi dependent adenylate cyclase-cAMP coupling in OCD (Marazziti et al., 2001; Perez et al., 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 15

2001) and its response to treatment. Indeed, clinically effective OCD treatments prevent 5-
HT1B receptor-induced repetitive behavior and striatal activation (Ho et al., 2015). 
Furthermore, elevated cAMP in H mice could be related to increased 5HT1A-adenylate 
cyclase-cAMP signaling with reduced hydrolysis by PDE4 (Korff et al., 2009). Interestingly, 
the PDE4 inhibitor rolipram decreases methamphetamine-induced stereotypy (Iyo et al., 
1995), suggesting that PDE4 active compounds may represent novel treatment options for 
OCD.

4.3. The need for an animal model presenting with multiple OCD phenotypes

OCD animal models are limited in their ability to address the cognitive-obsessive 
manifestations of OCD. In order to more closely relate to human OCD (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013), assessment of co-presenting symptoms of anxiety, social 
impairment and specific compulsive behaviors has been realized with the deer mouse 
preparation. This work has demonstrated different behavioral patterns in deer mice that 
cannot simply be regarded as compulsive repetition and formally establishes a cognitive-
psychobiological link in their behavior.

When considering the link between stereotypy and social deficits and anxiety, the 
ventromedial PFC and OFC function as the cortical inputs of the limbic loop, while the 
caudate functions as the striatal entry point for the associative loop (Mannella et al., 2013). 
This arrangement implicates a possible role for cross-talk between these two pathways in the 
pathology of OCD. Therefore stereotypy involves motor and limbic elements, making these 
two parameters and their associated behaviors important targets to be considered in an 
animal model of OCD.

4.3.1. Are deer mice anxious?—Although previously regarded as an anxiety disorder, 
OCD is now classified under the OC spectrum (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). 
Typical anxiolytics also have no clinical value in treating OCD (Fineberg and Craig, 2007). 
Nevertheless, OCD is often comorbid with social anxiety disorder (Assuncão et al., 2012; 
Kim et al., 2012) or poor social adjustment (Rosa et al., 2012), while it is widely recognized 
that OCD-related obsessions are accompanied with severe anxiety that in turn is alleviated 
by the apparent “anxiolytic” effect brought about by compulsive and repetitive acts.

H deer mice do not present with altered marble burying behavior, a measure of compulsivity 
or anxiety (neophobia), compared to non-stereotypic (N) mice (Wolmarans et al., 2016a). In 
fact, all deer mice exhibit a level of inherent burying behavior, thereby dissociating severity 
of stereotypy with anxiety. Moreover, a characteristically different within-species form of 
high burying behavior is evident in certain animals, although neither inherent nor high 
burying behavior responds to chronic SSRI treatment (Wolmarans et al., 2016a). Since 
chronic SSRI treatment is effective in OCD and anxiety, as well as in attenuating deer mouse 
stereotypy (Korff et al., 2008, 2009; Wolmarans et al., 2013), we conclude that anxiety is not 
a driving force for perseverative behavior in the deer mouse, which may be in line with the 
recent DSM-5 reclassification of OCD.

4.3.2. Social behavior in deer mice, what does it reveal about OCD?—Despite 
being a prominent symptom of OCD, social impairment is poorly studied in animals. Higher 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 16

rates of unemployment, marital discord and financial instability occur among adult OCD 
patients (Kim et al., 2012), while children with OCD display impaired abilities for making 
and keeping friends (Kim et al., 2012; Piacentini et al., 2003). Social phobia and OCD show 
varying symptom intensity, are characterized by severe occupational infringement, and 
respond preferentially to SSRI’s (Baldwin et al., 2008; Lochner et al., 2003; Niederauer et 
al., 2007). Furthermore, comorbid OCD and social impairment demonstrate greater OC 
symptom severity and treatment resistance (Alarcon et al., 1993; Khanna et al., 1988), while 
greater OC severity with poor social functioning predict a poor treatment outcome (Stewart 
et al., 2010). Finally, greater OCD severity may worsen social impairment and vice versa 
(Rosa et al.,2012). Considering children, young OCD sufferers tend to be more socially 
isolative in scenarios where normal peers may observe their behavior (Piacentini et al., 
2003).

Wolmarans et al. (2016b) noted distinctly different treatment-naive social behavior in N and 
H animals within and between cohorts. Also, a greater tendency of N animals to interact 
with one another and not with an H animal was observed from before to after chronic SSRI 
treatment, where such treatment also increased the sociability of H animals towards one 
another but not towards N animals. Deer mouse behavior therefore provides a unique insight 
into the social behavior of OCD patients and their social experiences in the presence of 
healthy peers. Thus, deer mice not only resemble the compulsive nature of motor repetition, 
but H behavior is also associated with changes in cognitive ability and emotional perception, 
as indicated by altered social interactivity and its response to treatment.

4.3.3. Does deer mouse behavior present with different OC behavioral 
phenotypes?—OCD is a phenotypically heterogeneous condition characterized by 
intrusive thoughts and/or compulsions of varying nature, of which four major OC symptom 
dimensions have been described, viz: 1) contamination obsessions and washing 
compulsions, 2) harm obsessions and checking compulsions, 3) symmetry obsessions and 
ordering compulsions, and 4) unacceptable thoughts and neutralizing compulsions 
(Abramovitch and Cooperman, 2015).

Nest-building (NB) behavior forms part of the normal behavioral repertoire of rodents, 
although differences in NB behavior (i.e., aberrant vs. normal NB) may resemble OC-like 
symptoms (e.g., work in rabbits by Hoffman and Morales, 2009). NB behavior in deer mice 
is highly variable, with no evident differences as a function of severity of stereotypy 
(Wolmarans et al., 2016c). However, as described for marble burying behavior above, a sub-
population from both H and N cohorts present with large NB behavior. However, in this 
instance large NB behavior is reversible with chronic SSRI treatment, implying that deer 
mouse behavior, like human OCD, presents with symptom heterogeneity.

Deer mouse behavior therefore resembles the inter-patient differences in OC 
phenomenology in that normal non-pathological (viz. N) and aberrant (viz. OC; H) 
stereotypical behavior is present. Moreover, different forms of OC phenotypes (viz. 
stereotypy and aberrant NB behavior) are also present, with both abrogated by chronic SSRI 
treatment. Different psychological constructs of OC behavior are thus presented, with 
stereotypy resembling motor-associated compulsive behavior and aberrant NB reflecting a 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 17

cognitive foundation in that it implicates a reason for compulsivity, i.e., concerns about 
security (Section 5). The latter would involve thoughtfulness in the expression of OC 
behavior.

4.4. Concluding remarks

Deer mouse stereotypy is a promising model for research into the neurobiology and behavior 
of OCD, as well as a platform for novel drug discovery and research into the genetics of 
OCD. It has provided confirmatory facts about OCD phenomenology, as well as new 
knowledge pertaining to its neurobiology and treatment.

5. Insights from analysis and synthesis of compulsive checking in rats: 

indications that OCD is a disturbance of motivation

5.1. Description of the quinpirole sensitization rat model of OCD

The notion that the transformation in behavior induced by chronic treatment with the DA 
agonist QNP could serve as an animal model of OCD arose by serendipity, during the course 
of research with animal models of psychosis. Specifically, experimental attempts to obtain 
from the behavior of QNP rats evidence of a psychotic state—expected from the DA 
hypothesis of schizophrenia (Carlsson, 1988; Willner, 1997)—did not yield the predicted 
result of disorganized activity (Szechtman et al., 1994b). Instead, watching these rats gave 
the impression of QNP behavior being “compulsive,” suggesting OCD pathology. To 
translate this impression into an experimental framework, Szechtman and colleagues 
followed Reed (1985) who argued that the structure of OCD symptoms, rather than their 
content, is more clinically relevant and revealing of mechanisms. Hence, they searched for 
the spatiotemporal structure of OCD compulsions in the clinical literature and derived from 
it the following set of salient features of compulsive checking: (a) preoccupation with and an 
exaggerated hesitancy to leave the item(s) of interest; (b) presence of a ritual-like quality in 
the performance of checking; (c) dependence of checking activity on environmental context; 
(d) attachment of checking activity to stimuli with a plausible relationship to safety and 
security; and, (e) an ability to interrupt checking behavior temporarily. They translated those 
features into a set of objective criteria by identifying specific tests and quantifiable 
dependent variables that indexed those criteria and showed that QNP-treated rats met the 
stated criteria for compulsive checking (Ben Pazi et al., 2001; Dvorkin et al., 2006; 
Szechtman et al., 2001, 1998a; Zadicario et al., 2007). Thus, because the spatiotemporal 
structure of QNP-induced behavior matched the salient features of OCD checking in the 
human, it was proposed that the QNP preparation constitutes an animal model of OCD 
compulsions and compulsive checking in particular (Szechtman et al., 1998a). A 
comprehensive description of the logic and details of this model has been reviewed (Eilam 
and Szechtman, 2005b; Szechtman et al., 1999; Szechtman and Eilam, 2005) and evaluated 
by others (Ahmari, 2015; Ahmari and Dougherty, 2015; Albelda and Joel, 2012ab; Alonso et 
al., 2015; Camilla d’Angelo et al., 2014; Diniz et al., 2012; Hoffman, 2011; Joel, 2006a; 
Korff and Harvey, 2006; Man et al., 2004; Pallanti et al., 2014; Westenberg et al., 2007).

The standard protocol to induce compulsive checking is a dose of QNP every 3–4 days (0.5 
mg/kg × 10); the rat is placed in the open field after each injection for 55 min. Control rats 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 18

receive an injection of saline. The open field is a large table without walls (1.6 by 1.6 m), 
with 4 small objects positioned at the same fixed locales throughout the study (see Fig. 9a). 
For analysis of rat activity, the x,y coordinates of the rat’s position in the open field are 
extracted from video records at a rate of 30 frames per second using EthoVision software 
(Noldus et al., 2001) and the obtained track files processed to derive the criteria measures of 
compulsive checking (Dvorkin et al., 2006, 2010). The open field is divided virtually into 25 
locales (Fig. 9b) and the criteria measures of compulsive checking are computed with 
reference to these locales. Evidence for compulsive checking requires the presence of a 
significant difference between the QNP- and saline-treated rats on all 4 criteria measures, as 
shown in Fig. 9c. Because repeated injections of QNP induce locomotor sensitization (Eilam 
and Szechtman, 1990; Eilam and Szechtman, 1983; Einat et al., 1996; Einat and Szechtman, 
1993; Szechtman et al., 1994a,b, 1993; Szumlinski et al., 1997), we often refer to the QNP 
preparation as the ‘quinpirole sensitization rat model of compulsive checking’. In essence, in 
the QNP sensitization model, compulsive checking is manifested by exaggerated 
preoccupation with one location in the environment, to which the animal returns repeatedly 
(Fig. 9c).

Overall, the QNP model of OCD is especially useful in two particular ways. First, it is open 
to a rich and sophisticated analysis of the behaviors that constitute the observable symptoms 
of the disorder. Indeed, the approach and methods developed to analyse compulsive 
checking in the rat were successfully applied to the analysis of rituals in OCD patients (see 
Section 7). Second, the model measures spontaneous behavior in an open-ended situation 
where there are no explicit rewards or contingencies. This simulates the condition which 
challenges OCD patients; namely, how to behave in situations of uncertainty where the 
environment does not dictate the optimal response (Boyer and Bergstrom, 2011; Cavedini et 
al., 2006; Lind and Boschen, 2009; Starcke et al., 2010; Tolin et al., 2003; Woody and 
Szechtman, 2006). Below we highlight one interesting insight that emerged from studies 
with the QNP model, namely, an empiric description of the meaning of “compulsive” and 
relevance for a motivational theory of OCD.

5.2. Is “compulsive” behavior a unitary phenomenon?

In the research literature on mechanisms of OCD, behavior is often labelled as “compulsive” 
and displaying “compulsivity.” However, as decried by Reed (1985) over 30 years ago, “the 
meaning of ‘compulsive’ is never examined; it seems to be regarded as so self-evident as to 
be unworthy of study or exposition” (p. 120, italics in original). One important question in 
the contrast between “compulsive behavior” and “normal behavior” (or “compulsivity” 
versus “normality”) is whether the compulsive phenotype is a unitary whole or whether the 
behavioral phenomenon labelled as “compulsive” (or “compulsivity”) is in fact comprised of 
discrete functional components. Because in the QNP model compulsive checking is 
characterized as an entire set of dependent measures, the question whether compulsive 
behavior is a unitary whole can be addressed by the method of nervous system fractionation 
(Teitelbaum, 1967, 2012; Teitelbaum and Pellis, 1992; Teitelbaum and Stricker, 1994). That 
is, if compulsive checking behavior is a unitary whole, then a lesion should affect the entire 
set as one entity. However, if the phenomenon is comprised of discrete functional 
components then a lesion in a specific part of the brain should affect some components and 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 19

not others, in essence fractionating the phenomenon into components. Two such lesion 
studies (Dvorkin et al., 2010; Tucci et al., 2014a) summarized below revealed that there exist 
at least two component processes underlying compulsive checking, both greatly exaggerated 
by QNP—one related to the vigour with which the behavior is performed and the other 
related to the focus with which checking is performed as a goal-directed activity.

5.2.1. Different lesions impact different checking measures—In a study by 
Dvorkin et al. (2010), rats received repeated injections of saline or QNP (0.5 mg/kg, twice 
per week, × 8 injections) to induce compulsive checking, and then received NMDA lesions 
of the basolateral amygdala (BLA), NAc, OFC, or sham lesions. When retested two weeks 
post-surgery, results showed effects of NAc and OFC lesion on checking behavior but no 
effect of the BLA lesion. Tellingly, as shown in Fig. 10, the set of criteria measures was split 
into two subsets — the NAc lesion affected the frequency of checking and length of check 
(top row), and the OFC lesion affected recurrence of checking and stops before checking 
(bottom row). These effects were evident on measures of checking behavior in saline-treated 
rats (blue colored bars; left bar cluster); the pertinent effects are indicated by the graph bar 
having a solid fill.

When it is analyzed whether the split into the two subsets reveals a meaningful subdivision, 
it becomes apparent that the measures in the top and bottom rows of Fig. 10 capture two 
distinct aspects in the performance of checking. The top row measures behavior performed 
at the place of checking (how often the rat returns to check the place/object and how long it 
stays there to perform the check). The bottom row measures the behavior of getting to the 
place of checking (how long was the rat elsewhere and how many places did it visit before 
returning to check the place/object of interest). That is, NAc lesions affected measures 
indicative of the amount of checking behavior, whereas OFC lesions affected indices of 
staying away from checking. Consistent with the literature as to the function of NAc, 
Dvorkin et al. (2010) suggested that this region mediates the vigour of checking, and thus 
one component of compulsive checking is the vigour of its motor performance. Similarly, 
they suggested that a second component is the focus or concentration on the task of 
checking. Accordingly, “compulsive” checking reflects a QNP-induced exaggeration of at 
least two functional components: (a) vigour of checking; and, (b) the focus on checking. It is 
noteworthy that the anatomical substrates on these two components appear to include parts 
of the CBGTC circuit, the OFC, and a ventral region of the striatum, NAc.

5.2.2. Synthesis by experiment of compulsive checking from components—
Following the proposition that the appropriateness of analysis ought to be confirmed with a 
synthesis of the behavior from its parts (Teitelbaum, 2012; Teitelbaum and Pellis, 1992), 
Szechtman and colleagues sought to re-synthesize compulsive checking from the identified 
components, without using QNP. In a study by Tucci et al. (2014a), the vigour component 
was reconstituted with a bilateral lesion of the NAc core, as this treatment exaggerates 
vigour in saline-treated rats (Dvorkin et al., 2010). To reconstitute focus, the employed 
treatment was a low dose of the 5-HT1A receptor agonist 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino) 
tetralin hydrochloride (DPAT) (0.0625 mg/kg), as high doses of this drug induce compulsive 
behavior (Alkhatib et al., 2013) and low doses show an effect on focus only. The study 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 20

consisted of a 2 × 2 fully crossed factorial design where one of the between-group factors 
was Lesion (sham lesion vs. NAc core lesion) and the other one was Drug (saline vs. DPAT). 
As shown in Fig. 11, neither the drug alone nor the NAc core lesion by itself produced 
compulsive checking but injection of DPAT to NAc core lesion rats did, confirming that 
vigour and focus are constitutive components of compulsive checking.

5.3. Diminished negative feedback in compulsive checking

Although compulsive checking appears comprised of vigorous performance and intense 
concentration, these two attributes are characteristic of any performance when motivation is 
high, and one normally would not label the performance of an individual who is highly 
motivated, as “compulsive.” Clearly, vigour and focus components are insufficient to mark a 
behavioral phenotype as “compulsive”— yet another component must operate to label 
checking as “compulsive”. Indeed, analysis revealed that performance of QNP-induced 
checking is characterized by yet another attribute, which sets compulsive behavior apart 
from normal motivation: normally, when a goal object is attained, the output of a motivated 
state ends for a prolonged period of time before the motivation is awakened again. For 
instance, eating terminates hunger motivation by generating a negative feedback signal that 
shuts down or “satiates” the motivation for food and hence, one generally sees only one bout 
of the motivated behavior in a particular time period. However, QNP-induced checking 
behavior is characterized by a very abbreviated period of time after a bout of checking 
before the start of another checking bout (see Fig. 12); consequently, there are several bouts 
of checking behavior in a relatively short period of time, suggesting a reduced negative 
feedback component between bouts of QNP-induced compulsive checking (Dvorkin et al., 
2006; Dvorkin et al., 2010). Thus, by describing behavior as “compulsive” one is 
highlighting highly motivated performance but without apparent satiation.

5.4. Compulsive checking in the rat suggests a motivational disturbance in OCD

Because the identified components of compulsive checking— (a) vigour of performance (b) 
focus on the task, and, (c) rest or “satiation” after task completion—are also intrinsic parts of 
a motivational system, it is a reasonable formulation that checking behavior in the rat is a 
motivated behavior, and that compulsive checking reflects the exaggerated function of that 
particular motivation. Remarkably, this hypothesis brings the work with rats into the 
framework of the security motivation theory of OCD (Szechtman and Woody, 2004; Woody 
and Szechtman, 2005) that originated in a separate and independent line of research 
(Szechtman et al., 1998b; Woody and Szechtman, 2000). It does so because the rat work 
raises the question what particular motivation has checking behavior as its output, an answer 
contained in the security motivation theory of OCD (Szechtman and Woody, 2004; Woody 
and Szechtman, 2005). Specifically, it had been proposed that there exists a special 
motivation—Security Motivation—evolved to handle the uncertainties of potential threats, 
and that a dysfunction in security motivation produces OCD (Szechtman and Woody, 2004; 
Woody and Szechtman, 2005). The notion of a special motivation for potential danger was 
based on clinical literature that the domain of most OCD thoughts and behaviors is safety 
and security (Reed, 1985) and on evidence from ethological and ecological literatures that 
animals show speciestypical behaviors for assessing various domains of potential harm, 
including potential threats related to predation and disease (e.g., Blanchard and Blanchard, 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 21

1988; Curio, 1993; Lima and Bednekoff, 1999; Wingfield et al., 1998). These considerations 
suggested that a security motivation system would produce not only the urge to engage with 
cues of potential danger but produce also speciestypical precaution and preventive responses 
such as checking or washing (Hinds et al., 2010; Szechtman and Woody, 2004; Woody and 
Szechtman, 2011, 2013). Accordingly, it was theorized that OCD symptoms emerge if there 
is a malfunction that prevents the normal de-activation of security motivation because 
preoccupation with issues of potential danger would continue, driving repeated performance 
of security-related behaviors such as checking or washing and the associated thoughts and 
ideas characteristic of OCD (Szechtman et al., 2014; Szechtman and Woody, 2004, 2006; 
Woody et al., 2005; Woody and Szechtman, 2005). Recent experimental support for this 
theory has come from studies showing that in individuals with OCD, performance of 
precautionary behaviors is indeed deficient in turning off an activated security motivation 
(Hinds et al., 2010, 2012). Moreover, the neuroanatomical structures associated with the 
component behaviors of the compulsive checking system are common elements of the 
CBGTC circuit implicated in OCD and have been proposed as the neural circuit of the 
security motivation system (Szechtman et al., 2014; Szechtman and Woody, 2004; Woody 
and Szechtman, 2011).

The reviewed decomposition of compulsive checking behavior in the rat into functional 
components and the characterization of compulsive checking as highly motivated 
performance but without apparent satiation, provides strikingly convergent support from an 
animal model for the security motivation theory of OCD (Szechtman and Woody, 2004; 
Woody and Szechtman, 2005).

6. Insights into OCD from neuromodulation in the QNP and signal 

attenuation (SA) models

6.1. Endophenotypes in OCD

In concordance with the existence of a heterogeneous group of patients, OCD patients do not 
show consistent responsiveness to treatment, as some patients respond well whereas others 
show partial or no response. In other words, the capacity of a treatment strategy to modulate 
specific pathophysiological disease substrates may not suffice as an efficient treatment for 
all OCD patients due to the existence of endophenotypes entailing a specific neurobiological 
substrate of behavior. It needs to be considered that: i) the same neuropathological 
mechanism may translate into different expressions of disease, ii) the same disease 
expression and symptom profile may result from different neurobiological trajectories and 
iii) a specific neurobiological substrate may translate into a specific symptom. Such 
considerations are mandatory when evaluating optimal therapeutic strategies, i.e. those that 
specifically interact with the pathophysiological substrate only at those times when symptom 
alleviation is needed and only in those brain regions and networks that are implicated in the 
disease process. As such, a pool of therapeutic options that are accurately defined with 
respect to their specific potential to interact with the underlying pathology of a specific 
endophenotype and its correlated neurobiological substrate may be appealing and entail the 
future of effective treatment of psychiatric disorders. While these challenges will ultimately 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 22

need to be met in the clinic, model rodents have aided considerably in addressing them at the 
proof-of-concept level.

6.2. Using two different animal models of compulsive behavior in parallel

As noted in the Introduction (Section 1), animal models do not recapitulate the full 
phenotype of a human disorder such as OCD. However, a phenotype or pathophysiological 
constructs of specific aspects of a psychiatric disorder including OCD may be modeled and 
the parallel use of different animal models ultimately leads to a more complex picture of the 
modeled disorder. The QNP model (Section 5) considers the pathophysiological relevance of 
the DA system in the manifestation of a repetitive symptom: The combination of an 
environmental context and repeated dopaminergic challenge with the DA D2/D3 receptor 
agonist QNP induces compulsive behavior that resembles compulsive checking behavior in 
the human (Szechtman et al., 1998a). The signal attenuation (SA) model is based on the 
theory that OC-behavior results from a disrupted feedback following the accomplishment of 
goal-directed behavior (Joel, 2006b). In this model, an external cue indicating the successful 
accomplishment of a specific goal-directed behavior (lever pressing) is attenuated by 
repeated exposure to the cue in the absence of the goal. This leads to a greater number of 
lever presses that are not “completed” by checking the feeder for food. The uncompleted 
lever presses are seen as excessive or compulsive, modeling compulsive behavior in OCD.

Consequently, the mechanisms by which compulsions are induced differ between the two 
models. Compulsions in the QNP model are provoked pharmacologically, whereas 
compulsions in the SA model are induced in drug-free rats following a behavioral paradigm. 
Therefore, the underlying neurobiological alterations mediating compulsive behavior may 
differ between the two models and result in different aspects of OCD. There is no doubt that 
both the SA and the QNP model of OCD constitute rodent models of strong face, predictive 
and construct validity. The differential way of manipulation leading to the induction of 
distinct symptoms suggests that the parallel investigation of these models may help define 
both neurobiological substrates specific for each of the distinct symptom profiles as well as 
those substrates related to common pathological pathways. By this, it becomes possible to 
envision the development of therapeutic strategies that either selectively target a specific 
symptom profile or generally interact with common pathological substrates of aberrant 
behavior.

6.3. DBS in the QNP and SA models

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has been established for the treatment of several movement 
disorders and currently is discussed as a therapeutic alternative for the treatment of 
intractable psychiatric disorders. Yet, DBS is more than merely an effective therapeutic tool. 
By its nature to selectively modulate activity within the DBS target itself and the associated 
networks, an evaluation of DBS effectiveness across pathologies allows for conclusion on 
the pathophysiological relevance of specific brain sites and networks. Further, evaluation of 
DBS effectiveness across endophenotypes of a single disease allows for conclusions on the 
specific pathological substrates of a specific symptom.

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 23

In this context, the QNP and the SA model of OCD were used in parallel to study the 
symptom-specific therapeutic effects of DBS and to conclude on the pathological 
involvement of several brain sites in the manifestation of OCD subtypes: i) the STN, ii) the 
GP differentiated into the lateral GP (LGP, rodent equivalent to external segment of the 
human GP) and the EP [rodent equivalent to internal segment of human GP (GPi)], iii) NAc, 
divided into the functionally and anatomically distinct NAc core and NAc shell. The overall 
effectiveness of STN- and NAc-DBS in ameliorating OC-symptoms has been validated 
clinically (Denys et al., 2010; Mallet et al., 2008). This also goes for DBS applied to the GPi 
— shown to alleviate symptoms in patients with Tourette’s syndrome comorbid with OC-
symptoms (Nair et al., 2014). Therapeutic responses are still largely restricted, however, 
suggesting the need for further investigation into the underlying pathology and subsequent 
effects of DBS in OCD-subtypes.

6.3.1. DBS of the GP, EP or STN—In studies with rodents, high frequency DBS applied 
to the GP and EP reduces compulsions in the SA model, whereas EP-DBS only partly 
reduces compulsive behavior and GP-DBS not at all in the QNP model (Djodari-Irani et al., 
2011; Klavir et al., 2011) (Fig. 13A). This observation that the two models do not react in 
the same manner towards neuromodulating interventions corroborates the notion that the 
underlying neurobiological alterations mediating compulsive behavior differ between the 
two models and thus result in different aspects of OCD (Djodari-Irani et al., 2011). Despite 
these differences, there might still be a final common pathway leading to compulsive 
behavior in both models. This is apparent as functional modification of the STN following 
DBS application reduces compulsions in both the SA and QNP model. The anti-compulsive 
effect of STN-DBS links the indirect pathway of the CBGTC circuit to the compulsive 
manifestations in both models (Klavir et al., 2009; Winter et al., 2008c). The QNP model is 
thought to express a hyperactive dopaminergic system due to repetitive QNP application. 
Since STN-DBS reduces compulsivity in both the QNP and SA model (e.g., drug-naive rat) 
this suggests that the anti-compulsive effect is not restricted to a hyper-dopaminergic system 
(Klavir et al., 2009).

6.3.2. DBS of nucleus accumbens and the possible role of DA and 5-HT—
Modification of the dopaminergic system indeed seems to be an important aspect of the anti-
compulsive effect of DBS especially in the QNP model where DBS applied to the NAc 
reduces compulsive behavior (Mundt et al., 2009). Since the NAc itself projects to 
dopaminergic neurons innervating the striatum, the anti-compulsive effects may be related to 
a normalisation of the abnormal dopaminergic activity induced by repetitive QNP 
application (Mundt et al., 2009). STN-DBS has furthermore been coupled to an increase in 
DA levels in the striatum and NAc (Meissner et al., 2003; Winter et al., 2008b). 
Interestingly, EP-DBS that only partially affects compulsive behavior in the QNP model, 
does not affect DA release in the striatum (Meissner et al., 2004). In the SA model, both 
STN and OFC lesions increase compulsive behavior. This behavior is coupled to a decrease 
in both 5-HT and DA content in the striatum (caudate putamen) and can subsequently be 
reversed by a SSRI. This indicates that normalisation of especially a dysfunctional striatal 
serotonergic system may be important for the anti-compulsive effect in the SA model 
(Schilman et al., 2010; Winter et al., 2008a). Taken together, there is the possibility that both 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 24

the dopaminergic and serotonergic neurotransmitter systems are involved in compulsions, 
yet one or the other may dominate in each of the two models, giving rise to the different 
model subtypes (Fig. 13B).

6.4. Inactivation of CBGTC circuit targets

Direct inactivation of some targets within the CBGTC circuit abolishes compulsive behavior 
regardless of the model. Direct inactivation of the STN, GP or EP by administration of the 
GABA agonist muscimol decreases compulsion in the SA and QNP model (Djodari-Irani et 
al., 2011; Klavir et al., 2009; Winter et al., 2008c). The behavioral effect of STN inactivation 
corresponds to that observed following STN-DBS in both models – initially indicating a 
common mechanism of both interventions. Yet, the differential effect mediated by muscimol 
and EP- or GP-DBS in the QNP model, states otherwise. This shows that DBS effects are 
different from a direct silencing and further may indicate that the neuromodulating effect of 
DBS depends on the cellular arrangement of the target structure (Djodari-Irani et al., 2011). 
If this is indeed the case, the cellular arrangement of the EP and GP may ultimately differ 
between the two models, which further highlight differences between the two models.

6.5. Conclusions

These data suggest that there is not just one pathophysiological mechanism underlying the 
whole spectrum of OCD manifestation but rather that specific neurobiological profiles 
translate into specific symptom profiles. The well-accepted inability of animal models to 
recapitulate the full phenotype of uniquely human disorders such as OCD simultaneously 
constitutes their strength in modeling specific aspects of the whole phenotype. The parallel 
use of different model rodents of different subtypes allows for evaluation of neurobiological 
substrates of the specific disease expressions and the establishment of therapeutic strategies 
that directly interact with the endophenotypic neurobiological substrate. Based on these 
findings, we may conclude that of the DBS targets investigated in the QNP and SA animal 
models of OCD, the STN constitutes a region where DBS elicits symptom-comprehensive 
effects, whereas the GP and NAc may be selected for DBS treatment of OCD patients with 
symptom profiles resulting from predominantly serotonergic or dopaminergic deficits, 
respectively.

7. From the quinpirole rat model for OCD to clinical OCD patients: 

translating an animal model into practice

7.1. Translational research

The field of translational research was introduced to promote the application of basic 
research in clinical practice (Zerhouni, 2003). In other words, this field of research offers an 
interface between basic science and clinical medicine, coined by Woolf (2008) as ‘bench to 
bedside’. Relying on Darwin’s notion that the difference between humans and non-humans 
is one of degree, not of kind (Dalgleish, 2004; Darwin, 1871), the concept of translational 
research in animals may seem obvious. Indeed, while there are clear differences between 
humans and other animals, there are also many similarities. Nevertheless, there is a large 
mental gap between humans and non-humans (Penn et al., 2008), and this gap hinders the 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 25

translational studies of animal models for psychiatric disorders. To overcome this obstacle in 
developing an animal model for OCD, a descriptive and analytic approach that originated in 
studying movement in humans was utilized. Specifically, this approach borrowed tools from 
the Eshkol-Wachman Movement Notation (EWMN), which was designed to describe the 
movements of ballet dancers in the same way that notes describe music (Eshkol and 
Wachman, 1958). The EWMN had been previously applied in the study of animal behavior 
in general (Golani, 1992) and specifically in studying spatial behavior in rats (Eilam and 
Golani, 1988, 1989). In those studies, behavior was regarded as intervals of travel that are 
interrupted by stops (stationary episodes). Accordingly, the analysis was based on scoring: 
(i) the sets of movements that rats perform when they are stationary in a specific locale; and 
(ii) the trajectories of the routes connecting these locales, assuming that during locomotion 
rats cannot perform movements like rearing and grooming that they perform when stationary 
(Eilam and Golani, 1989; Eilam et al., 1989; Weiss et al., 2012). Notably, the application of 
this approach revealed numerous similarities between spatial behavior in humans and in 
rodents (for a comprehensive review, see Eilam, 2014). In the context of OCD, this analytic 
approach was first applied to the study of behavior of rats sensitized to the D2/3 DA agonist 
QNP (Eilam et al., 1989).

7.2. Compulsive behavior as a set of trajectories bounded by sets of acts

Following several injections of QNP to rats in a large (1.6 × 1.6 m) open field, activity 
increased to as much as 16-fold higher than after the first injection. However, the rats’ 
activity was limited to specific paths in the open field (Eilam et al., 1991). Moreover, the rats 
seemed to travel hurriedly from place to place with unbounded curiosity as if performing an 
important mission, and they did not appear to habituate to the environment or succumb to 
fatigue (Szechtman et al., 1994b). This behavior of QNP rats was suggested as a model for 
compulsive checking (Szechtman et al., 1998a) and was further supported in a large set of 
studies (e.g., Alkhatib et al., 2013; Tucci et al., 2013, 2014b). This compulsive-like behavior 
of QNP rats in the open field is based on two types of performance: (i) path stereotypy; and 
(ii) fixed sets of acts in specific locations (see Section 5 and Fig. 14).

In parallel with reinforcing the QNP rat as a model for OCD, Eilam and colleagues 
commenced experiments aimed at materializing the translational potential of this model, 
seeking to scrutinize the compulsive behavior of OCD patients on the basis of the same 
separation that was used in rats: the sets of movements that patients perform when stationary 
in a specific locale and the trajectories of the routes connecting these locales. This method is 
illustrated in Fig. 15, in which the routes and movements of an OCD patient are depicted, 
based on an excerpt from the diary of that patient published in Rasmussen and Eisen (1991).

7.3. Compulsive OCD rituals: predominance of idiosyncrasy and repetitions

What is lacking in Fig. 15 is an appropriate control that could highlight what is abnormal in 
this behavior, in addition to the apparent long duration and numerous repetitions. The need 
for appropriate reference for OCD behavior is a major obstacle, considering the great 
variability in patients’ behavior, where one could have a compulsive checking of the door, 
another washes hands compulsively, a third one has a ritual when lighting a cigarette, and so 
on. To overcome this variability, a control individual was matched to each OCD ritual. 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 26

Specifically, after an OCD patient performed on camera, a matched healthy individual of 
similar age and gender was asked to perform the same task that formed the OCD ritual. For 
example, if a patient described his/her ritual as locking the house door, the respective control 
was requested to lock his house door too. After scoring the acts performed by an OCD 
patient and his control individual, their act repertoire was divided into common acts 
performed by both and idiosyncratic acts performed by only one of them. Moreover, it was 
suggested that the common acts are compulsory for performance of that specific task, 
whereas the idiosyncratic acts are unnecessary for its completion (Zor et al., 2009). The idea 
that idiosyncratic acts are unnecessary rests on the fact that one actor (the patient or the 
control individual) was able to complete the task without these acts. Fig. 16 depicts the set of 
acts by a control individual (top) and OCD patient (bottom) when each was locking his car. 
The large circles depict common acts whereas the small circles depict idiosyncratic acts.

Applying the division to common and idiosyncratic acts for the repertoire of acts (repetitions 
excluded) of 43 rituals performed by 39 OCD patients revealed that there were three-fold 
more idiosyncratic acts in OCD patients compared with their respective control individuals 
(Fig. 17). Accordingly, the performance of OCD patients was termed pessimal (antonym of 
optimal) behavior (Zor et al., 2009). A discussion on the possible role of idiosyncratic acts in 
OCD as well as in normal behavior is available elsewhere (Eilam, 2015).

Further scrutiny of the temporal order of acts revealed that OCD rituals typically end with a 
long chain of idiosyncratic acts (see Fig. 16 for example). Since these acts are considered 
unnecessary for task completion, it was suggested that the prevalence of activity after the 
functional end of the task increased the non-functionality in OCD motor rituals and supports 
the theory of “lack of stop signal” as the underlying mechanism in OCD (Zor et al., 2011). 
The same methodology was also used to compare cleaning and checking rituals, with the 
findings indicating that these rituals are sufficiently different to justify their division into 
different subtypes, which presumably are sub-served by different mechanisms (Zor et al., 
2011). Similarly, the division into common and idiosyncratic acts also revealed that 
between-country and/or culture differences among OCD patients were mild, possibly 
overridden by the conspicuous impact of OCD pathology that resulted in a similar OCD 
phenotype (Zor et al., 2010). Finally, the overt and eye-catching prevalence of idiosyncratic 
acts has been recently implemented as a bed-sign in clinical OCD patients (Amitai et al., 
unpublished manuscript).

7.4. Summary: bench to bedside

In psychiatry, the diagnosis of mental disorders is established on the basis of behavior and, 
therefore, the assessment of movement patterns offers a common baseline for the 
comparison and study of different syndromes. This seems especially true for compulsions 
and stereotypies, which are primarily associated with repetitive behaviors and rigid routines. 
Here, it was demonstrated how movement notation, which is a sign language for the 
description of movement in humans, was applied in a study of the QNP rat model for OCD 
and ultimately led to implementing the approach in the clinic. In other words, this 
translational model provided us with tools that could be applied directly for studies of motor 
rituals in OCD patients, studies that are now implemented in OCD clinics. The model 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 27

demonstrated here thus offers an illustration of the path of a translational model from the 
bench (animal behavioral analysis lab) to the bedside (OCD clinics).

8. Conclusions

Good models generate novel insights, and this should be the case for animal models of 
psychiatric disorders as well. The present review considered the use and utility of animal 
models in research on mechanisms underlying the psychiatric disorder, OCD. This review 
was not intended to summarize the growing area of research using animal models of OCD, 
as a number of such first-rate publications already exists (Ahmari, 2015; Ahmari and 
Dougherty, 2015; Albelda and Joel, 2012a,b; Alonso et al., 2015; Boulougouris et al., 2009; 
Camilla d’Angelo et al., 2014; Diniz et al., 2012; Eilam and Szechtman, 2005b; Eilam et al., 
2012; Grados et al., 2015; Gunaydin and Kreitzer, 2016; Hoffman, 2011; Joel, 2006a; Korff 
and Harvey, 2006; Man et al., 2004; Ting and Feng, 2011b; Wang et al., 2009; Westenberg et 
al., 2007). Instead, the current synthesis is unique in that it brings together several 
independent investigators to highlight a few features of their research where animal models 
serve as exemplars of fruitful questions and areas of investigation into OCD. Some key 
points that emerged from each section above include:

1.

2.

3.

4.

Establishment of a cause-effect relation between neural circuit hyperactivity and 
OCD symptoms requires the experimental manipulation of the neural circuit to 
induce the symptoms in question and this can be done in animals as shown with 
the optogenetic studies in mice where optical stimulation of VMS led to 
excessive grooming that was still present up to 2 weeks after the last stimulation 
(reviewed in Section 2).

Because OCD presents with different symptom combinations, this suggests the 
presence of endophenotypes and the likelihood that specific symptom profiles 
would respond best with targeted therapeutics. Parallel use of several animal 
models is a fruitful paradigm to examine the mechanisms of treatment effects of 
DBS in distinct OCD endophenotypes, as suggested by differential effects of 
DBS at several sites within the CBGTC circuit of QNP-treated and SA model 
rats (reviewed in Section 6).

Features of spontaneous behavior in a subpopulation of deer mice show many 
properties of OCD compulsions, providing a naturalistic model of compulsive 
behaviors. This preparation constitutes a rich platform to investigate the 
neurobiology of OCD, the social ramifications of a compulsive phenotype, and a 
vehicle for drug discovery. The latter has emphasized targeting pathways of 
oxidative stress and PDE4 activity within the CBGTC circuits as possible 
treatment options for OCD (reviewed in Section 4).

Mechanisms underlying comorbidity of OCD with other psychiatric disorders 
such as schizophrenia may involve shared neural circuits controlling expression 
of compulsive behavior, as suggested by enhanced SIP in various animal models 
and associated brain changes in parts of the CBGTC circuit implicated in OCD 
(reviewed in Section 3).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 28

5.

6.

Analysis of compulsive behavior into its constitutive functional components 
provides evidence from an animal model for a motivational perspective on OCD, 
as suggested by findings in QNP-sensitized rats that ‘compulsive’ checking has 
the attributes of highly motivated performance but without apparent satiation. 
This is consistent with the theory that a malfunction in a negative feedback signal 
that shuts-down an activated security motivation produces OCD (reviewed in 
Section 5).

Because in psychiatry diagnosis of mental disorders is largely from behavioral 
data, assessment of movement patterns in animals and humans offers a common 
methodology to study psychiatric syndromes in animal models. Applied 
successfully to implement the QNP model of OCD, methods from this animal 
model were used to dissect compulsive rituals in OCD patients, with findings 
ultimately leading to a bed-side test with patients, so illustrating the translational 
path to the clinic (reviewed in Section 7).

In all, the reviewed studies show the use and utility of animal work in directing research on 
OCD and the insights gained from behavioral neuroscience research on this disorder.

Acknowledgments

Supported by operating grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR MOP-64424), the Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC RGPIN A0544) and the Ontario Mental Health 
Foundation (OMHF) to HS; NSERC (RGPIN-2015-05465) and OMHF to RJB; South African Medical Research 
Council and National Research Foundation (grant number 77323) to BHH who also acknowledges Lundbeck A/S® 
for sponsoring the escitalopram used in the presented work; Else Kroner-Fresenius Foundation (Grant 2008_A132), 
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (Grant 01EW1409 (EraNet Neuron framework) and 
Grant 01EE1403A (GCBS)), and GIF grant (851/2004) to CW and HEC.

Abbreviations

5-HT

ACC

AAV

DBS

BLA

BNST

cAMP

CBGTC

ChR2

DA

DPAT

EP

serotonin

anterior cingulate cortex

adenovirus-associated vector

deep brain stimulation

basolateral amygdala

bed nucleus of the stria terminalis

cyclic adenosine-monophosphate

cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical

channelrhodopsin

dopamine

8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino) tetralin hydrochloride

entopeduncular nucleus

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 29

EWMN

EYFP

fMRI

FT

GABA

GSH

GP

GPi

H

LGP

mPFC

N

NAc

NB

NMDA

OC

OCD

OFC

PDE

PFC

QNP

SA

Eshkol-Wachman Movement Notation

enhanced yellow fluorescent protein

functional magnetic resonance imaging

fixed time

γ-amino butyric acid

glutathione

globus pallidus

internal segment of the globus pallidus

high stereotypic (deer mice)

lateral globus pallidus

medial prefrontal cortex

non-stereotypic (deer mice)

nucleus accumbens

nest-building

N-methyl-d-aspartate

obsessive-compulsive

obsessive-compulsive disorder

orbitofrontal cortex

phosphodiesterase

prefrontal cortex

quinpirole

signal attenuation

Schizo-OCD

comorbid schizophrenia and obsessive-compulsive disorder

SERT

SIP

SSRI

STN

VI

VMS

serotonin transporter

schedule-induced polydipsia

serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitor

subthalamic nucleus

variable interval

ventromedial striatum

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

References

Page 30

Abe Y, Sakai Y, Nishida S, Nakamae T, Yamada K, Fukui K, Narumoto J. Hyper-influence of the 

orbitofrontal cortex over the ventral striatum in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015; 25(11):1898–1905. [PubMed: 26395293] 

Abi-Dargham A, Rodenhiser J, Printz D, Zea-Ponce Y, Gil R, Kegeles LS, Weiss R, Cooper TB, Mann 

JJ, Van Heertum RL, Gorman JM, Laruelle M. Increased baseline occupancyofd2 receptors 
bydopamine in schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000; 97(14):8104–8109. [PubMed: 
10884434] 

Abramovitch A, Cooperman A. The cognitive neuropsychology of obsessive-compulsive disorder: a 

critical review. J Obsessive-Compuls Relat Disord. 2015; 5:24–36.

Abramson, LY., Seligman, MEP. Modeling psychopathologyin the laboratory: history and rationale. In: 

Maser, JD., Seligman, MEP., editors. Psychopathology: Experimental Models. Freeman; San 
Franscisco: 1977. p. 1-26.

Afshar H, Roohafza H, Mohammad-Beigi H, Haghighi M, Jahangard L, Shokouh P, Sadeghi M, 
Hafezian H. N-acetylcysteine add-on treatment in refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder: a 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2012; 32(6):797–803. 
[PubMed: 23131885] 

Ahmari SE, Dougherty DD. Dissecting OCD. circuits: from animal models to targeted treatments 

Depress. Anxiety. 2015; 32(8):550–562. [PubMed: 25952989] 

Ahmari SE, Spellman T, Douglass NL, Kheirbek MA, Simpson HB, Deisseroth K, Gordon JA, Hen R. 

Repeated cortico-striatal stimulation generates persistent OCD-like behavior. Science. 2013; 
340(6137):1234–1239. [PubMed: 23744948] 

Ahmari SE. Using mice to model obsessive compulsive disorder: from genes to circuits. Neuroscience. 

2015

Alarcon RD, Libb JW, Spitler D. A predictive study of obsessive-compulsive disorder response to 

clomipramine. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 1993; 13(3):210–213. [PubMed: 8354737] 

Albelda N, Joel D. Animal models of obsessive-compulsive disorder: exploring pharmacology and 

neural substrates. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012a; 36(1):47–63. [PubMed: 21527287] 

Albelda N, Joel D. Current animal models of obsessive compulsive disorder: an update. Neuroscience. 

2012b; 211(0):83–106. [PubMed: 21925243] 

Alkhatib AH, Dvorkin-Gheva A, Szechtman H. Quinpirole and 8-oh-dpat induce compulsive checking 

behavior in male rats by acting on different functional parts of an OCD neurocircuit. Behav 
Pharmacol. 2013; 24(1):65–73. [PubMed: 23249525] 

Alonso P, Lopez-Sola C, Real E, Segalas C, Menchon JM. Animal models of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder: utility and limitations. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2015; 11:1939–1955. [PubMed: 
26346234] 

Amato D, Milella MS, Badiani A, Nencini P. Compulsive-like effects of quinpirole on drinking 

behavior in rats are inhibited by substituting ethanol for water. Behav Brain Res. 2007; 177(2):
340–346. [PubMed: 17157931] 

Amato D, Stasi MA, Borsini F, Nencini P. Haloperidol both prevents and reverses quinpirole-induced 

nonregulatory water in take, a putative animal model of psychogenic polydipsia. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2008; 200(2):157–165. [PubMed: 18597076] 

American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (dsm-5®). 

American Psychiatric Pub; 2013. 

Amitai, M., Arnon, N., Shaham, N., Gur, S., Apter, A., Weizman, A., Hermesh, H. unpublished 

manuscript. Unnecessary written over-additions in standardized clinical questionnaires as a simple 
marker for OCD. 

Anticevic A, Hu S, Zhang S, Savic A, Billingslea E, Wasylink S, Repovs G, Cole MW, Bednarski S, 

Krystal JH, Bloch MH, Li CS, Pittenger C. Global resting-state functional magnetic resonance 
imaging analysis identifies frontal cortex, striatal, and cerebellar dysconnectivity in obsessive-
compulsive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2014; 75(8):595–605. [PubMed: 24314349] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 31

Aouizerate B, Guehl D, Cuny E, Rougier A, Burbaud P, Tignol J, Bioulac B. Updated overview of the 
putative role of the serotoninergic system in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Neuropsychiatr Dis 
Treat. 2005; 1(3):231–243. [PubMed: 18568072] 

Aoyama K, Suh SW, Hamby AM, Liu J, Chan WY, Chen Y, Swanson RA. Neuronal glutathione 
deficiency and age-dependent neurodegeneration in the eaac1 deficient mouse. Nat Neurosci. 
2006; 9(1):119–126. [PubMed: 16311588] 

Assunção MC, Lucas da Conceição Costa D, Mathis MAd, Gedanke Shavitt R, Arzeno Ferrão Y, 

Rosário MCd, Constantino Miguel E, Rodrigues Torres A. Social phobia in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder: prevalence and correlates. J Affect Disord. 2012; 143(1–3):138–147. [PubMed: 
22858214] 

Atmaca M, Onalan E, Yildirim H, Yuce H, Koc M, Korkmaz S, Mermi O. Serotonin transporter gene 
polymorphism implicates reduced orbito-frontal cortex in obsessive-compulsive disorder. J 
AnxietyDisord. 2011; 25(5):680–685.

Baldwin DS, Brandish EK, Meron D. The overlap of obsessive-compulsive disorder and social phobia 

and its treatment. CNS Spectr. 2008; 9(Suppl. 14):47–53.

Behl A, Swami G, Sircar SS, Bhatia MS, Banerjee BD. Relationship of possible stress-related 
biochemical markers to oxidative/antioxidative status in obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
Neuropsychobiology. 2010; 61(4):210–214. [PubMed: 20389131] 

Belzung C, Lemoine M. Criteria of validity for animal models of psychiatric disorders: focus on 

anxiety disorders and depression. Biol Mood Anxiety Disord. 2011; 1(1):9. [PubMed: 22738250] 

Ben Pazi A, Szechtman H, Eilam D. The morphogenesis of motor rituals in rats treated chronically 
with the dopamine agonist quinpirole. Behav Neurosci. 2001; 115(6):1301–1317. [PubMed: 
11770061] 

Berk M, Malhi GS, Gray LJ, Dean OM. The promise of n-acetylcysteine in neuropsychiatry Trends 

Pharmacol. Sci. 2013; 34(3):167–177.

Beucke JC, Sepulcre J, Talukdar T, Linnman C, Zschenderlein K, Endrass T, Kaufmann C, Kathmann 
N. Abnormally high degree connectivity of the orbitofrontal cortex in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013; 70(6):619–629. [PubMed: 23740050] 

Bienvenu OJ, Wang Y, Shugart YY, Welch JM, Grados MA, Fyer AJ, Rauch SL, McCracken JT, 

Rasmussen SA, Murphy DL, Cullen B, Valle D, Hoehn-Saric R, Greenberg BD, Pinto A, Knowles 
JA, Piacentini J, Pauls DL, Liang KY, Willour VL, Riddle M, Samuels JF, Feng G, Nestadt G. 
Sapap3 and pathological grooming in humans: results from the OCD collaborative genetics study. 
Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2009; 150B(5):710–720. [PubMed: 19051237] 
Blanchard DC, Blanchard RJ. Ethoexperimental approaches to the biology of emotion. Annu Rev 

Psychol. 1988; 39:43–68. [PubMed: 2894198] 

Boulougouris V, Chamberlain SR, Robbins TW. Cross-species models of OCD spectrum disorders. 

Psychiatry Res. 2009; 170(1):15–21. [PubMed: 19819024] 

Boyer P, Bergstrom B. Threat-detection in child development: an evolutionary perspective. Neurosci 

Biobehav Rev. 2011; 35(4):1034–1041. [PubMed: 20832423] 

Brambilla F, Perna G, Bussi R, Bellodi L. Dopamine function in obsessive compulsive disorder: 

cortisol response to acute apomorphine stimulation. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2000; 25(3):301–
310. [PubMed: 10737700] 

Camilla d’Angelo L-S, Eagle DM, Grant JE, Fineberg NA, Robbins TW, Chamberlain SR. Animal 

models of obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders. CNS Spectr. 2014; 19(1):28–49. [PubMed: 
24093759] 

Carlsson A. The current status of the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 1988; 1(3):179–186. [PubMed: 3075131] 

Castner SA, Goldman-Rakic PS, Williams GV. Animal models of working memory: insights for 

targeting cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2004; 174(1):111–
125. [PubMed: 15205882] 

Cavedini P, Gorini A, Bellodi L. Understanding obsessive-compulsive disorder: focus on decision 

making. Neuropsychol Rev. 2006; 16(1):3–15. [PubMed: 16708289] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 32

Chakraborty S, Dasgupta A, Das HN, Singh OP, Mandal AK, Mandal N. Study of oxidative stress in 
obsessive compulsiv disorder in response to treatment with fluoxetine. Indian J Clin Biochem. 
2009; 24(2):194–197. [PubMed: 23105832] 

Chamberlain SR, Menzies L, Hampshire A, Suckling J, Fineberg NA, del Campo N, Aitken M, Craig 
K, Owen AM, Bullmore ET, Robbins TW, Sahakian BJ. Orbitofrontal dysfunction in patients with 
obsessive-compulsive disorder and their unaffected relatives. Science. 2008; 321(5887):421–422. 
[PubMed: 18635808] 

Chapanis A. Men, machines, and models. Am Psychol. 1961; 16:113–131.
Cioli I, Caricati A, Nencini P. Quinpirole- and amphetamine-induced hyperdipsia: influence of fluid 
palatability and behavioral cost. Behav Brain Res. 2000; 109(1):9–18. [PubMed: 10699653] 
Costa E, Davis JM, Dong E, Grayson DR, Guidotti A, Tremolizzo L, Veldic M. A gabaergic cortical 
deficit dominates schizophrenia pathophysiology? Crit Rev Neurobiol. 2004; 16(1–2):1–23. 
[PubMed: 15581395] 

Crino R, Slade T, Andrews G. The changing prevalence and severity of obsessive-compulsive disorder 
criteria from dsm-iii to dsm-iv. Am J Psychiatry. 2005; 162(5):876–882. [PubMed: 15863788] 

Curio E. Proximate and developmental aspects of antipredator behavior. Adv Study Behav. 1993; 

22:135–238.

Dalgleish T. The emotional brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004; 5:582–589.
Darwin, C. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. John Murray; London: 1871. 
De Carolis L, Schepisi C, Milella M, Nencini P. Clomipramine, but not haloperidol or aripiprazole, 
inhibits quinpirole-induced water contrafreeloading, a putative animal model of compulsive 
behavior. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2011; 218(4):749–759. [PubMed: 21660444] 

de Leon J, Verghese C, Tracy JI, Josiassen RC, Simpson GM. Polydipsia and water intoxication in 

psychiatric patients: a review of the epidemiological literature. Biol Psychiatry. 1994; 35(6):408–
419. [PubMed: 8018788] 

de Wit SJ, Alonso P, Schweren L, Mataix-Cols D, Lochner C, Menchon JM, Stein DJ, Fouche JP, 
Soriano-Mas C, Sato JR, Hoexter MQ, Denys D, Nakamae T, Nishida S, Kwon JS, Jang JH, 
Busatto GF, Cardoner N, Cath DC, Fukui K, Jung WH, Kim SN, Miguel EC, Narumoto J, Phillips 
ML, Pujol J, Remijnse PL, Sakai Y, Shin NY, Yamada K, Veltman DJ, van den Heuvel OA. 
Multicenter voxel-based morphometry mega-analysis of structural brain scans in obsessive-
compulsive disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2014; 171(3):340–349. [PubMed: 24220667] 

Denys D, Zohar J, Westenberg HG. The role of dopamine in obsessive-compulsive disorder: preclinical 

and clinical evidence. J Clin Psychiatry. 2004; 65(Suppl. 14):11–17.

Denys D, Figee M, Mantione M, van den Munckhof P, Schuurman R. Targets for deep brain 
stimulation in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatr Ann. 2010; 40(10):492–498.

Diniz JB, Miguel EC, de Oliveira AR, Reimer AE, Brandao ML, de Mathis MA, Batistuzzo MC, Costa 

DLC, Hoexter MQ. Outlining new frontiers for the comprehension of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder: a review of its relationship with fear and anxiety. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2012; 34:S81–S103. 
[PubMed: 22729451] 

Djodari-Irani A, Klein J, Banzhaf J, Joel D, Heinz A, Harnack D, Lagemann T, Juckel G, Kupsch A, 

Morgenstern R, Winter C. Activity modulation of the globus pallidus and the nucleus 
entopeduncularis affects compulsive checking in rats. Behav Brain Res. 2011; 219(1):149–158. 
[PubMed: 21219934] 

Dvorkin A, Perreault ML, Szechtman H. Development and temporal organization of compulsive 

checking induced by repeated injections of the dopamine agonist quinpirole in an animal model of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behav Brain Res. 2006; 169(2):303–311. [PubMed: 16524632] 
Dvorkin A, Silva C, McMurran T, Bisnaire L, Foster J, Szechtman H. Features of compulsive checking 
behavior mediated by nucleus accumbens and orbital frontal cortex. Eur J Neurosci. 2010; 32(9):
1552–1563. [PubMed: 20731708] 

Eilam D, Golani I. The ontogeny of exploratory-behavior in the house rat (rattus-rattus)—the mobility 

gradient. Dev Psychobiol. 1988; 21(7):679–710. [PubMed: 3234601] 

Eilam D, Golani I. Home base behavior ofrats (rattus norvegicus) exploring a novel environment. 

Behav Brain Res. 1989; 34(3):199–211. [PubMed: 2789700] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 33

Eilam D, Szechtman H. Dosing regimen differentiates sensitization of locomotion and mouthing to d2 

agonist quinpirole. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1990; 36:989–991. [PubMed: 1977180] 
Eilam D, Szechtman H. Psychostimulant-induced behavior as an animal model of obsessive-

compulsive disorder: an ethological approach to the form of compulsive rituals. CNS Spectr. 
2005a; 10(3):191–202. [PubMed: 15744221] 

Eilam D, Szechtman H. Psychostimulant-induced behavior as an animal model of obsessive-

compulsive disorder: an ethologlocal approach to the form of compulsive rituals. CNS Spectr. 
2005b; 10(3):191–202. [PubMed: 15744221] 

Eilam D, Golani I, Szechtman H. D2-agonist quinpirole induces perseveration of routes and 

hyperactivity but no perseveration of movements. Brain Res. 1989; 490(2):255–267. [PubMed: 
2527582] 

Eilam D, Clements KV, Szechtman H. Differential effects of d1 and d2 dopamine agonists on 

stereotyped locomotion in rats. Behav Brain Res. 1991; 45(2):117–124. [PubMed: 1686397] 
Eilam D, Zor R, Szechtman H, Hermesh H. Rituals, stereotypy and compulsive behavior in animals 

and humans. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2006; 30(4):456–471. [PubMed: 16253329] 

Eilam D, Zor R, Fineberg N, Hermesh H. Animal behavior as a conceptual framework for the study of 

obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Behav Brain Res. 2012; 231(2):289–296. [PubMed: 
21763354] 

Eilam D. Of mice and men: building blocks in cognitive mapping. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2014; 

47:393–409. [PubMed: 25265515] 

Eilam D. The cognitive roles of behavioral variability: idiosyncratic acts as the foundation of identity 

and as transitional preparatory, and confirmatory phases. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2015; 49:55–70. 
[PubMed: 25511818] 

Einat H, Szechtman H. Environmental modulation of both locomotor response and locomotor 
sensitization to the dopamine agonist quinpirole. Behav Pharmacol. 1993; 4(4):399–403. 
[PubMed: 11224208] 

Einat H, Einat D, Allan M, Talangbayan H, Tsafnat T, Szechtman H. Associational and 

nonassociational mechanisms in locomotor sensitization to the dopamine agonist quinpirole. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1996; 127(2):95–101. [PubMed: 8888373] 

El Mansari M, Blier P. Mechanisms of action of current and potential pharmacotherapies of obsessive-

compulsive disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2006; 30(3):362–373. 
[PubMed: 16427729] 

Erzegovesi S, Guglielmo E, Siliprandi F, Bellodi L. Low-dose risperidone augmentation of 

fluvoxamine treatment in obsessive-compulsive disorder: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. 
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2005; 15(1):69–74. [PubMed: 15572275] 

Eshkol, N., Wachman, A. Movement Notation. Weidenfeld and Nicholson; London: 1958. 
Evans DW, Lewis MD, Iobst E. The role of the orbitofrontal cortex in normally developing 

compulsive-like behaviors and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Brain Cogn. 2004; 55(1):220–234. 
[PubMed: 15134855] 

Falk JL. Production of polydipsia in normal rats by an intermittent food schedule. Science. 1961; 

133(3447):195–196. [PubMed: 13698026] 

Falk JL. Conditions producing psychogenic polydipsia in animals. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1969; 157(2):

569–593. [PubMed: 5255630] 

Falk JL. The nature and determinants ofadjunctive behavior. Physiol Behav. 1971; 6(5):577–588. 

[PubMed: 5004684] 

Fineberg NA, Craig KJ. Pharmacological treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatry. 

2007; 6(6):234–239.

Fineberg NA, Nigam A, Sivakumaran T. Pharmacologic strategies for treatment-resistant OCD: a 

review of the evidence. Psychiatr Ann. 2006; 36(7):464.

Fraioli S, Cioli I, Nencini P. Amphetamine reinstates polydipsia induced by chronic exposure to 

quinpirole a dopaminergic d2 agonist, in rats. Behav Brain Res. 1997; 89(1–2):199–215. [PubMed: 
9475627] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 34

Geyer, MA., Markou, A. Animal models ofpsychiatric disorders. In: Bloom, FE., Kupfer, DJ., editors. 
Psychopharmacology: The Fourth Generation of Progress. Raven Press; New York: 1995. p. 
787-798.

Geyer, MA., Moghaddam, B. Animal models relevant to schizophrenia disorders. In: Davis, 

KL.Charney, DS.Coyle, JT., Nemeroff, CB., editors. Neuropsychopharmacology: The Fifth 
Generation of Progress. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; Washington, DC: 2002. p. 689-701.

Golani I. A mobility gradient in the organization ofvertebrate movement—the perception of movement 

through symbolic language. Behav Brain Sci. 1992; 15(2):249–266.

Goldman MB. The mechanism of life-threatening water imbalance in schizophrenia and its 

relationship to the underlying psychiatric illness. Brain Res Rev. 2009; 61(2):210–220. [PubMed: 
19595703] 

Goodman WK, McDougle CJ, Price LH, Riddle MA, Pauls DL, Leckman JF. Beyond the serotonin 

hypothesis: a role for dopamine in some forms of obsessive compulsive disorder? J Clin 
Psychiatry. 1990:36–43.

Gorski JA, Talley T, Qiu M, Puelles L, Rubenstein JL, Jones KR. Cortical excitatory neurons and glia, 
but not gabaergic neurons, are produced in the emx1-expressing lineage. J Neurosci. 2002; 22(15):
6309–6314. [PubMed: 12151506] 

Grados MA, Specht MW, Sung HM, Fortune D. Glutamate drugs and pharmacogenetics of OCD: a 
pathway-based exploratory approach. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2013; 8(12):1515–1527. 
[PubMed: 24147578] 

Grados M, Prazak M, Saif A, Halls A. A review of animal models of obsessive-compulsive disorder: a 
focus on developmental, immune, endocrine and behavioral models. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 
2015:1–17.

Gregory JG, Hawken ER, Banasikowski TJ, Dumont EC, Beninger RJ. A response strategy predicts 
acquisition of schedule-induced polydipsia in rats. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 
2015; 61:37–43. [PubMed: 25816789] 

Guldenpfennig M, Wolmarans de W, du Preez JL, Stein DJ, Harvey BH. Cortico-striatal oxidative 

status: dopamine turnover and relation with stereotypy in the deer mouse. Physiol Behav. 2011; 
103(3–4):404–411. [PubMed: 21397620] 

Gunaydin LA, Kreitzer AC. Cortico-basal ganglia circuit function in psychiatric disease. Annu Rev 

Physiol. 2016; 78(1)

Hadley C, Hadley B, Ephraim S, Yang M, Lewis MH. Spontaneous stereotypy and environmental 

enrichment in deer mice (peromyscus maniculatus): reversibility of experience. Appl Anim Behav 
Sci. 2006; 97(2):312–322.

Harrison BJ, Soriano-Mas C, Pujol J, Ortiz H, Lopez-Sola M, Hernandez-Ribas R, Deus J, Alonso P, 
Yucel M, Pantelis C, Menchon JM, Cardoner N. Altered corticostriatal functional connectivity in 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009; 66(11):1189–1200. [PubMed: 
19884607] 

Harrison BJ, Pujol J, Cardoner N, Deus J, Alonso P, Lopez-Sola M, Contreras-Rodriguez O, Real E, 
Segalas C, Blanco-Hinojo L, Menchon JM, Soriano-Mas C. Brain corticostriatal systems and the 
major clinical symptom dimensions of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2013; 
73(4):321–328. [PubMed: 23200527] 

Hawken ER, Beninger RJ. The amphetamine sensitization model of schizophrenia symptoms and its 
effect on schedule-induced polydipsia in the rat. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2014; 231(9):2001–
2008. [PubMed: 24241687] 

Hawken ER, Delva NJ, Reynolds JN, Beninger RJ. lncreased schedule-induced polydipsia in the rat 
following subchronic treatment with mk-801. Schizophr Res. 2011; 125(1):93–98. [PubMed: 
20719474] 

Hawken ER, Delva NJ, Beninger RJ. lncreased drinking following social isolation rearing: 

implications for polydipsia associated with schizophrenia. PLoS One. 2013; 8(2):e56105. 
[PubMed: 23441161] 

Henderson JG Jr, Pollard CA. Three types of obsessive compulsive disorder in a community sample. J 

Clin Psychol. 1988; 44(5):747–752. [PubMed: 3263989] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 35

Hensler JG, Cervera LS, Miller HA, Corbitt J. Expression and modulation of 5-hydroxytryptamine1a 
receptors in p11 cells. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1996; 278(3):1138–1145. [PubMed: 8819496] 
Hesse S, Miiller U, Lincke T, Barthel H, Villmann T, Angermeyer MC, Sabri O, Stengler-Wenzke K. 
Serotonin and dopamine transporter imaging in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
Psychiatry Res. 2005; 140(1):63–72. [PubMed: 16213689] 

Hickey AJ, Reynolds JN, Beninger RJ. Post-weaning social isolation and subchronic nmda glutamate 
recepto blockade: effects on locomotor activity and gaba signaling in the rat suggest independent 
mechanisms. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2012; 101(2):231–238. [PubMed: 22293110] 

Hinds AL, Woody EZ, Drandic A, Schmidt LA, Van Ameringen M, Coroneos M, Szechtman H. The 
psychology ofpotential threat: properties of the security motivation system. Biol Psychol. 2010; 
85(2):331–337. [PubMed: 20723575] 

Hinds AL, Woody EZ, Van Ameringen M, Schmidt LA, Szechtman H. When too much is not enough: 
obsessive-compulsive disorder as a pathology of stopping, rather than starting. PLoS One. 2012; 
7(1):e30586. [PubMed: 22291994] 

Ho EV, Thompson SL, Katzka WR, Sharifi MF, Knowles JA, Dulawa SC. Clinically effective OCD 

treatment prevents 5-ht1b receptor-induced repetitive behavior and striatal activation. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2015; 233(1):57–70. [PubMed: 26423528] 

Hoffman KL, Morales RIR. Toward an understanding of the neurobiology of just right perceptions: 

nest building in the female rabbit as a possible model for compulsive behavior and the perception 
of task completion. Behav Brain Res. 2009; 204(1):182–191. [PubMed: 19523987] 

Hoffman KL. Animal models ofobsessive compulsive disorder: recent findings and future directions. 

Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2011; 6(7):725–737. [PubMed: 22650979] 

Hoffman, KL. Modeling Neuropsychiatric Disorders in Laboratory Animals. Woodhead Publishing; 
2016a. 4-Animal models for studying obsessive-compulsive and related disorders; p. 161-241.
Hoffman, KL. Modeling Neuropsychiatric Disorders in Laboratory Animals. 1. Woodhead Publishing, 

Elsevier Science and Technology; Cambridge: 2016b. 

Hollander E, DeCaria C, Gully R, Nitescu A, Suckow RF, Gorman JM, Klein DF, Liebowitz MR. 
Effects of chronic fluoxetine treatment on behavioral and neuroendocrine responses to meta-
chlorophenylpiperazine in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Res. 1991; 36(1):1–17. 
[PubMed: 2017519] 

Husted DS, Shapira NA, Goodman WK. The neurocircuitry of obsessive-compulsive disorder and 
disgust. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2006; 30(3):389–399. [PubMed: 
16443315] 

Iyo M, Maeda Y, Inada T, Kitao Y, Sasaki H, Fukui S. The effects of a selective camp 
phosphodiesterase inhibitor, rolipram, on methamphetamine-induced behavior. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 1995; 13(1):33–39. [PubMed: 8526969] 

Jentsch JD, Redmond DE Jr, Elsworth JD, Taylor JR, Youngren KD, Roth RH. Enduring cognitive 
deficits and cortical dopamine dysfunction in monkeys after long-term administration of 
phencyclidine. Science. 1997; 277(5328):953–955. [PubMed: 9252326] 

Jentsch JD, Taylor JR, Roth RH. Subchronic phencyclidine administration increases mesolimbic 
dopaminergic system responsivity and augments stress-and psychostimulant-induced 
hyperlocomotion. Neuropsychopharmacology. 1998; 19(2):105–113. [PubMed: 9629564] 

Joel D. Current animal models of obsessive compulsive disorder: a critical review. Prog 

Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2006a; 30(3):374–388. [PubMed: 16457927] 

Joel D. The signal attenuation rat model of obsessive-compulsive disorder: a review. 

Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2006b; 186(4):487–503. [PubMed: 16718482] 

Jones CA, Watson DJG, Fone KCF. Animal models of schizophrenia. Br J Pharmacol. 2011; 164(4):

1162–1184. [PubMed: 21449915] 

Karno M, Golding JM, Sorenson SB, Burnam MA. The epidemiology of obsessive-compulsive 

disorder in five us communities. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1988; 45(12):1094–1099. [PubMed: 
3264144] 

Khanna S, Rajendra PN, Channabasavanna SM. Social adjustment in obsessive compulsive disorder. 

Int J Soc Psychiatry. 1988; 34(2):118–122. [PubMed: 3410656] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 36

Khanna S, John JP, Lakshmi Reddy P. Neuroendocrine and behavioral responses to mcpp in obsessive-

compulsive disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2001; 26(2):209–223. [PubMed: 11087965] 
Kim KL, Reynolds KC, Alfano CA. Social impairment in children with obsessive compulsive disorder: 
do comorbid problems of inattention and hyperactivity matter? J Obsessive-Compuls Relat 
Disord. 2012; 1(4):228–233.

Kim SY, Adhikari A, Lee SY, Marshel JH, Kim CK, Mallory CS, Lo M, Pak S, Mattis J, Lim BK, 

Malenka RC, Warden MR, Neve R, Tye KM, Deisseroth K. Diverging neural pathways assemble 
a behavioural state from separable features in anxiety. Nature. 2013; 496(7444):219–223. 
[PubMed: 23515158] 

Klavir O, Flash S, Winter C, Joel D. High frequency stimulation and pharmacological inactivation of 
the subthalamic nucleus reduces ‘compulsive’ lever-pressing in rats. Exp Neurol. 2009; 215(1):
101–109. [PubMed: 18951894] 

Klavir O, Winter C, Joel D. High but not low frequency stimulation of both the globus pallidus and the 
entopeduncular nucleus reduces ‘compulsive’ lever-pressing in rats. Behav Brain Res. 2011; 
216(1):84–93. [PubMed: 20654653] 

Koran LM. Quality of life in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2000; 23(3):

509–517. [PubMed: 10986724] 

Korff S, Harvey BH. Animal models of obsessive-compulsive disorder: rationale to understanding 

psychobiology and pharmacology. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2006; 29(2):371–390. [PubMed: 
16650714] 

Korff S, Stein DJ, Harvey BH. Stereotypic behaviour in the deer mouse: pharmacological validation 
and relevance for obsessive compulsive disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 
2008; 32(2):348–355. [PubMed: 17888556] 

Korff S, Stein DJ, Harvey BH. Cortico-striatal cyclic amp-phosphodiesterase-4 signalling and 

stereotypy in the deer mouse: attenuation after chronic fluoxetine treatment. Pharmacol Biochem 
Behav. 2009; 92(3):514–520. [PubMed: 19463268] 

Lazar NL, Neufeld RW, Cain DP. Contribution of nonprimate animal models in understanding the 
etiology of schizophrenia. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2011; 36(4):E5–E29. [PubMed: 21247514] 

Leckman JF, Denys D, Simpson HB, Mataix-Cols D, Hollander E, Saxena S, Miguel EC, Rauch SL, 

Goodman WK, Phillips KA, Stein DJ. Obsessive-compulsive disorder: a review of the diagnostic 
criteria and possible subtypes and dimensional specifiers for dsm-v. Depress Anxiety. 2010; 
27(6):507–527. [PubMed: 20217853] 

Lima SL, Bednekoff PA. Back to the basics of antipredatory vigilance: can nonvigilant animals detect 

attack? Anim Behav. 1999; 58(3):537–543. [PubMed: 10479369] 

Lind C, Boschen MJ. Intolerance of uncertainty mediates the relationship between responsibility 
beliefs and compulsive checking. J Anxiety Disord. 2009; 23(8):1047–1052. [PubMed: 
19656653] 

Lochner C, Mogotsi M, du Toit PL, Kaminer D, Niehaus DJ, Stein DJ. Quality of life in anxiety 

disorders: a comparison of obsessive-compulsive disorder, social anxiety disorder, and panic 
disorder. Psychopathology. 2003; 36(5):255–262. [PubMed: 14571055] 

Lochner C, McGregor N, Hemmings S, Harvey BH, Breet E, Swanevelder S, Stein DJ. Symmetry 

symptoms in obsessive-compulsive disorder: clinical and genetic correlates. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 
2015; 38(1):17–23. [PubMed: 26291046] 

Lodge DJ, Grace AA. Divergent activation of ventromedial and ventrolateral dopamine systems in 

animal models of amphetamine sensitization and schizophrenia. lnt J Neuropsychopharmacol. 
2012; 15(1):69–76.

Maia TV, Cooney RE, Peterson BS. The neural bases of obsessive-compulsive disorder in children and 

adults. Dev Psychopathol. 2008; 20(4):1251–1283. [PubMed: 18838041] 

Mallet L, Polosan M, Jaafari N, Baup N, Welter ML, Fontaine D, du Montcel ST, Yelnik J, Chereau l, 

Arbus C, Raoul S, Aouizerate B, Damier P, Chabardes S, Czernecki V, Ardouin C, Krebs MO, 
Bardinet E, Chaynes P, Burbaud P, Cornu P, Derost P, Bougerol T, Bataille B, Mattei V, Dormont 
D, Devaux B, Verin M, Houeto JL, Pollak P, Benabid AL, Agid Y, Krack P, Millet B, Pelissolo A. 
Subthalamic nucleus stimulation in severe obsessive-compulsive disorder. N Engl J Med. 2008; 
359(20):2121–2134. [PubMed: 19005196] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 37

Man J, Hudson AL, Ashton D, Nutt DJ. Animal models for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Curr 

Neuropharmacol. 2004; 2(2):169–181.

Mannella F, Gurney K, Baldassarre G. The nucleus accumbens as a nexus between values and goals in 
goal-directed behavior: a review and a new hypothesis. Front Behav Neurosci. 2013; 7:135. 
[PubMed: 24167476] 

Marazziti D, Perez J, Cassano GB. ls obsessive-compulsive disorder caused by a second-messenger 

imbalance? CNS Spectr. 2001; 6(3):206–209. [PubMed: 16951654] 

Markarian Y, Larson MJ, Aldea MA, Baldwin SA, Good D, Berkeljon A, Murphy TK, Storch EA, 

McKay D. Multiple pathways to functional impairment in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Clin 
Psychol Rev. 2010; 30(1):78–88. [PubMed: 19853982] 

Marsh R, Maia TV, Peterson BS. Functional disturbances within frontostriatal circuits across multiple 

childhood psychopathologies. Am J Psychiatry. 2009; 166(6):664–674. [PubMed: 19448188] 
Mataix-Cols D, Wooderson S, Lawrence N, Brammer MJ, Speckens A, Phillips ML. Distinct neural 

correlates of washing, checking, and hoarding symptom dimensions in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004; 61(6):564–576. [PubMed: 15184236] 

Matsumoto R, Ichise M, Ito H, Ando T, Takahashi H, Ikoma Y, Kosaka J, Arakawa R, Fujimura Y, Ota 
M, Takano A, Fukui K, Nakayama K, Suhara T. Reduced serotonin transporter binding in the 
insular cortex in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: a [11c]dasb pet study. Neuroimage. 
2010; 49(1):121–126. [PubMed: 19660554] 

McDonald RJ, White NM. A triple dissociation of memory systems: hippocampus, amygdala, and 

dorsal striatum. Behav Neurosci. 1993; 107(1):3–22. [PubMed: 8447956] 

McKinney WT Jr, Bunney WE Jr. Animal model of depression. I. Review of evidence: implications for 

research. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1969; 21(2):240–248. [PubMed: 4980592] 

McKinney, WT. Models of Mental Disorders: a New Comparative Psychiatry. Plenum Medical Book 

Co; New York: 1988. p. 199

Meissner W, Harnack D, Reese R, Paul G, Reum T, Ansorge M, Kusserow H, Winter C, Morgenstern 
R, Kupsch A. High-frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nucleu enhances striatal dopamine 
release and metabolism in rats. J Neurochem. 2003; 85(3):601–609. [PubMed: 12694386] 
Meissner W, Harnack D, Hoessle N, Bezard E, Winter C, Morgenstern R, Kupsch A. High frequency 

stimulation of the entopeduncular nucleus has no effect on striatal dopaminergic transmission. 
Neurochem Int. 2004; 44(4):281–286. [PubMed: 14602091] 

Menzies L, Chamberlain SR, Laird AR, Thelen SM, Sahakian BJ, Bullmore ET. Integrating evidence 
from neuroimaging and neuropsychological studies of obsessive-compulsive disorder: the 
orbitofronto-striatal model revisited. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2008; 32(3):525–549. [PubMed: 
18061263] 

Milella MS, Amato D, Badiani A, Nencini P. The influence of cost manipulation on water 

contrafreeloading induced by repeated exposure to quinpirole in the rat. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl). 2008; 197(3):379–390. [PubMed: 18189126] 

Millan MJ, Dekeyne A, Gobert A. Serotonin (5-ht)2c receptors tonically inhibit dopamine (da) and 

noradrenaline (na), but not 5-ht, release in the frontal cortex in vivo. Neuropharmacology. 1998; 
37(7):953–955. [PubMed: 9776391] 

Moller M, Du Preez JL, Emsley R, Harvey BH. Isolation rearing-induced deficits in sensorimotor 

gating and social interaction in rate are related to cortico-striatal oxidative stress, and reversed by 
sub-chronic clozapine administration. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011; 21(6):471–483. 
[PubMed: 20965701] 

Moller M, Du Preez JL, Viljoen FP, Berk M, Emsley R, Harvey BH. Social isolation rearing induces 

mitochondrial, immunological, neurochemical and behavioural deficits in rats, and is reversed by 
clozapine or n-acetyl cysteine. Brain Behav Immunol. 2013; 30:156–167.

Monteiro P, Feng G. Learning from animal models of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 

2016; 79(1):7–16. [PubMed: 26037910] 

Moreno M, Flores P. Schedule-induced polydipsia as a model of compulsive behavior: 

neuropharmacological and neuroendocrine bases. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2012; 219(2):
647–659. [PubMed: 22113447] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 38

Mundt A, Klein J, Joel D, Heinz A, Djodari-Irani A, Harnack D, Kupsch A, Orawa H, Juckel G, 

Morgenstern R, Winter C. High-frequency stimulation of the nucleus accumbens core and shell 
reduces quinpirole-induced compulsive checking in rats. Eur J Neurosci. 2009; 29(12):2401–
2412. [PubMed: 19490027] 

Murray, CJ., Lopez, AD. The Global Burden of Disease: a Comprehensive Assessment of Mortality 
and Disability from Diseases, Injuries and Risk Factors in 1990 and Projected to 2020. Vol. 1. 
Harvard School of Public Health; Cambridge, MA: 1996. Global Burden of Disease and Injury 
Series

Nair G, Evans A, Bear RE, Velakoulis D, Bittar RG. The anteromedial gpi as a new target for deep 

brain stimulation in obsessive compulsive disorder. J Clin Neurosci. 2014; 21(5):815–821. 
[PubMed: 24524950] 

Niederauer KG, Braga DT, Souza FP, Meyer E, Cordioli AV. uality of life in individuals with 

obsessive-compulsive disorder: a review. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2007; 29(3):271–278. [PubMed: 
17713688] 

Noldus LP, Spink AJ, Tegelenbosch RA. Ethovision: a versatile video tracking system for automation 

of behavioral experiments. Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput. 2001; 33(3):398–414. 
[PubMed: 11591072] 

Packard MG, McGaugh JL. Inactivation of hippocampus or caudate nucleus with lidocaine 

differentially affects expression of place and response learning. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 1996; 
65(1):65–72. [PubMed: 8673408] 

Page LA, Rubia K, Deeley Q, Daly E, Toal F, Mataix-Cols D, Giampietro V, Schmitz N, Murphy DG. 

A functional magnetic resonance imaging study of inhibitory control in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Psychiatry Res. 2009; 174(3):202–209. [PubMed: 19906516] 

Pallanti S, Grassi G, Cantisani A. Emerging drugs to treat obsessive-compulsive disorder. Expert Opin 

Emerg Drugs. 2014; 19(1):66–77.

Paydary K, Akamaloo A, Ahmadipour A, Pishgar F, Emamzadehfard S, Akhondzadeh S. N-

acetylcysteine augmentation therapy for moderate-to-severe obsessive-compulsive disorder: 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2016; 41(2):214–219. 
[PubMed: 26931055] 

Pellon R, Ruiz A, Moreno M, Claro F, Ambrosio E, Flores P. Individual differences in schedule-

induced polydipsia: neuroanatomical dopamine divergences. Behav Brain Res. 2011; 217(1):
195–201. [PubMed: 20974181] 

Penn DC, Holyoak KJ, Povinelli DJ. Darwin’s mistake: explaining the discontinuity between human 

and nonhuman minds Behav. Brain Sci. 2008; 31:109–178.

Perez J, Tardito D, Racagni G, Smeraldi E, Zanardi R. Protein kinase a and rap 1 levels in platelets of 

untreated patients with major depression. Mol Psychiatry. 2001; 6(1):44–49. [PubMed: 
11244484] 

Piacentini J, Bergman RL, Keller M, McCracken J. Functional impairment in children and adolescents 
with obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2003; 13(Suppl. 1):S61–
69. [PubMed: 12880501] 

Pineyro G, Blier P. Autoregulation of serotonin neurons: role in antidepressant drug action. Pharmacol 

Rev. 1999; 51(3):533–591. [PubMed: 10471417] 

Pitchot W, Hansenne M, Moreno AG, Ansseau M. Growth hormone response to apomorphine in 

obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 1996; 21(5):343–345. [PubMed: 8973055] 
Pittenger C, Krystal JH, Coric V. Glutamate-modulating drugs as novel pharmacotherapeutic agents in 

the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. NeuroRx. 2006; 3(1):69–81. [PubMed: 
16490414] 

Pittenger C, Bloch MH, Williams K. Glutamate abnormalities in obsessive compulsive disorder: 
neurobiology, pathophysiology, and treatment. Pharmacol Ther. 2011; 132(3):314–332. 
[PubMed: 21963369] 

Posner J, Marsh R, Maia TV, Peterson BS, Gruber A, Simpson HB. Reduced functional connectivity 

within the limbic cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical loop in unmedicated adults with obsessive-
compulsive disorder. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014; 35(6):2852–2860. [PubMed: 24123377] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 39

Powell CM, Miyakawa T. Schizophrenia-relevant behavioral testing in rodent models: a uniquely 

human disorder? Biol Psychiatry. 2006; 59(12):1198–1207. [PubMed: 16797265] 

Powell SB, Newman HA, Pendergast JF, Lewis MH. A rodent model of spontaneous stereotypy: initial 

characterization of developmental, environmental, and neurobiological factors. Physiol Behav. 
1999; 66(2):355–363. [PubMed: 10336165] 

Radua J, Mataix-Cols D. Voxel-wise meta-analysis of grey matter changes in obsessive-compulsive 

disorder. Br J Psychiatry. 2009; 195(5):393–402. [PubMed: 19880927] 

Rasmussen, S., Eisen, JL. Phenomenology of OCD: Clinical subtypes, heterogeneity and coexistence. 
In: Zohar, J.Insel, T., Rasmussen, S., editors. The Psychobiology of Obsessive-compulsive 
Disorder. Vol. 4. Springer Publishing Company; New York: 1991. p. 13-43.

Rasmussen SA, Eisen JL. The epidemiology and differential diagnosis of obsessive compulsive 

disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 1992; 53(Suppl):4–10.

Rauch SL, Savage CR, Alpert NM, Fischman AJ, Jenike MA. The functional neuroanatomy of 
anxiety: a study of three disorders using positron emission tomography and symptom 
provocation. Biol Psychiatry. 1997; 42(6):446–452. [PubMed: 9285080] 

Reed, GF. Obsessional Experience and Compulsive Behaviour: a Cognitive-structural Approach. 

Academic Press, Inc.; Orlando, Florida: 1985. p. 246

Reimold M, Smolka MN, Zimmer A, Batra A, Knobel A, Solbach C, Mundt A, Smoltczyk HU, 
Goldman D, Mann K, Reischl G, Machulla HJ, Bares R, Heinz A. Reduced availability of 
serotonin transporters in obsessive-compulsive disorder correlates with symptom severity—a 
[11c]dasb pet study. J Neural Transm. 2007; 114(12):1603–1609. [PubMed: 17713719] 
Rodman AM, Milad MR, Deckersbach T, Im J, Chou T, Dougherty DD. Neuroimaging contributions 

to novel surgical treatments for intractable obsessive-compulsive disorder. Expert Rev Neurother. 
2012; 12(2):219–227. [PubMed: 22288677] 

Rosa AC, Diniz JB, Fossaluza V, Torres AR, Fontenelle LF, De Mathis AS, da Conceicao Rosario M, 
Miguel EC, Shavitt RG. Clinical correlates of social adjustment in patients with obsessive-
compulsive disorder. J Psychiatr Res. 2012; 46(10):1286–1292. [PubMed: 22800713] 

Rotge JY, Guehl D, Dilharreguy B, Cuny E, Tignol J, Bioulac B, Allard M, Burbaud P, Aouizerate B. 
Provocation ofobsessive-compulsive symptoms: a quantitative voxel-based meta-analysis 
offunctional neuroimaging studies. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2008; 33(5):405–412. [PubMed: 
18787662] 

Rotge JY, Guehl D, Dilharreguy B, Tignol J, Bioulac B, Allard M, Burbaud P, Aouizerate B. Meta-

analysis of brain volume changes in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 65(1):
75–83. [PubMed: 18718575] 

Rotge JY, Langbour N, Jaafari N, Guehl D, Bioulac B, Aouizerate B, Allard M, Burbaud P. 

Anatomical alterations and symptom-related functional activity in obsessive-compulsive disorder 
are correlated in the lateral orbitofrontal cortex. Biol Psychiatry. 2010; 67(7):e37–38. [PubMed: 
20015485] 

Roth RM, Saykin AJ, Flashman LA, Pixley HS, West JD, Mamourian AC. Event-related functional 
magnetic resonance imaging of response inhibition in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2007; 62(8):901–909. [PubMed: 17511967] 

Rowland N, Antelman SM, Kocan D. Elevated water intake in rats treated chronically with 

amphetamine: drinking in excess of need? Appetite. 1981; 2(1):51–66. [PubMed: 7337439] 
Saxena S, Bota RG, Brody AL. Brain-behavior relationships in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Semin 

Clin Neuropsychiatry. 2001; 6(2):82–101. [PubMed: 11296309] 

Schepisi C, De Carolis L, Nencini P. Effects of the 5ht2c antagonist sb242084 on the pramipexole-

induced potentiation of water contrafreeloading, a putative animal model of compulsive behavior. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2013; 227(1):55–66. [PubMed: 23241649] 

Schilman EA, Klavir O, Winter C, Sohr R, Joel D. The role of the striatum in compulsive behavior in 

intact and orbitofrontal-cortex-lesioned rats: possible involvement of the serotonergic system. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010; 35(4):1026–1039. [PubMed: 20072118] 

Schroeder U, Schroeder H, Schwegler H, Sabel BA. Neuroleptics ameliorate phencyclidine-induced 
impairments of short-term memory. Br J Pharmacol. 2000; 130(1):33–40. [PubMed: 10780995] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 40

Selek S, Herken H, Bulut M, Ceylan MF, Celik H, Savas HA, Erel O. Oxidative imbalance in obsessive 

compulsive disorder patients: a total evaluation of oxidant-antioxidant status. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2008; 32(2):487–491. [PubMed: 18006203] 
Shanahan NA, Velez LP, Masten VL, Dulawa SC. Essential role for orbitofrontal serotonin 1b 
receptors in obsessive-compulsive disorder-like behavior and serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
response in mice. Biol Psychiatry. 2011; 70(11):1039–1048. [PubMed: 21920503] 

Simpson SM, Menard JL, Reynolds JN, Beninger RJ. Post-weaning social isolation increases activity 

in a novel environment but decreases defensive burying and subchronic mk–801 enhances the 
activity but not the burying effect in rats. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2010; 95(1):72–79. 
[PubMed: 20035782] 

Skinner, BF. The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis. Appleton—Century; Oxford, 

England: 1938. p. 457

Squire LR. Memory systems of the brain: a brief history and current perspective. Neurobiol Learn 

Mem. 2004; 82(3):171–177. [PubMed: 15464402] 

Starcke K, Tuschen-Caffier B, Markowitsch HJ, Brand M. Dissociation of decisions in ambiguous and 
risky situations in obsessive-compulsive disorder? Psychiatry Res. 2010; 175(1–2):114–120. 
[PubMed: 20004479] 

Stein DJ. Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Lancet. 2002; 360(9330):397–405. [PubMed: 12241794] 
Stewart SE, Jenike EA, Hezel DM, Stack DE, Dodman NH, Shuster L, Jenike MA. A single-blinded 

case-control study of memantine in severe obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol. 2010; 30(1):34–39. [PubMed: 20075645] 

Stolerman IP, D’Mello GD. Amphetamine-induced hypodipsia and its implications for conditioned 
taste aversion in rats. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1978; 8(4):333–338. [PubMed: 674245] 
Szechtman, H., Eilam, D. Psychiatric models. In: Whishaw, IQ., Kolb, B., editors. The Behavior of the 

Laboratory Rat: A Handbook with Tests. Oxford University Press; New York: 2005. p. 462-474.

Szechtman H, Woody E. Obsessive-compulsive disorder as a disturbance of security motivation. 

Psychol Rev. 2004; 111(1):111–127. [PubMed: 14756589] 

Szechtman H, Woody EZ. Obsessive-compulsive disorder as a disturbance of security motivation: 
constraints on comorbidity. Neurotox Res. 2006; 10(2):103–112. [PubMed: 17062372] 
Szechtman H, Talangbayan H, Eilam D. Environmental and behavioral components of sensitization 

induced by the dopamine agonist quinpirole. Behav Pharmacol. 1993; 4(4):405–410. [PubMed: 
11224209] 

Szechtman H, Dai H, Mustafa S, Einat H, Sullivan RM. Effects of dose and interdose interval on 

locomotor sensitization to the dopamine agonist quinpirole. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1994a; 
48(4):921–928. [PubMed: 7972297] 

Szechtman H, Talangbayan H, Canaran G, Dai H, Eilam D. Dynamics of behavioral sensitization 

induced by the dopamine agonist quinpirole and a proposed central energy control mechanism 
[published erratum appears in Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 1994 Sep;116(1):124]. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1994b; 115:95–104. [PubMed: 7862919] 

Szechtman H, Sulis W, Eilam D. Quinpirole induces compulsive checking behavior in rats: a potential 
animal model ofobsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Behav Neurosci. 1998a; 112(6):1475–
1485. [PubMed: 9926830] 

Szechtman H, Woody E, Bowers KS, Nahmias C. Where the imaginal appears real: a positron 

emission tomography study of auditory hallucinations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998b; 95(4):
1956–1960. [PubMed: 9465124] 

Szechtman H, Culver K, Eilam D. Role of dopamine systems in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD): 
Implications from a novel psychostimulant-induced animal model. Pol J Pharmacol. 1999; 51(1):
55–61. [PubMed: 10389145] 

Szechtman H, Eckert MJ, Tse WS, Boersma JT, Bonura CA, McClelland JZ, Culver KE, Eilam D. 
Compulsive checking behavior of quinpirole-sensitized rats as an animal model of obsessive-
compulsive disorder(OCD): form and control. BMC Neurosci. 2001; 2:4. [PubMed: 11316464] 

Szechtman, H., Shivji, S., Woody, E. Pathophysiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder: insights from 
normal function and neurotoxic effects of drugs, infection, and brain injury. In: Kostrzewa, RM., 
editor. Handbook of Neurotoxicity. Springer; New York: 2014. p. 2231-2253.

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 41

Szumlinski KK, Allan M, Talangbayan H, Tracey A, Szechtman H. Locomotor sensitization to 
quinpirole: environment-modulated increase in efficacy and context-dependent increase in 
potency. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1997; 134(2):193–200. [PubMed: 9399384] 

Teitelbaum P, Pellis SM. Toward a synthetic physiological psychology. Psychol Sci. 1992; 3(1):4–20.
Teitelbaum P, Stricker EM. Compound complementarities in the study of motivated behavior. Psychol 

Rev. 1994; 101(2):312–317. [PubMed: 8022961] 

Teitelbaum, P. Physiological Psychology: Fundamental Principles. Prentice-Hall; Englewood Cliffs, 

NJ: 1967. p. 120

Teitelbaum P. Some useful insights for graduat students beginning their research in physiological 

psychology: anecdotes and attitudes. Behav Brain Res. 2012; 231(2):234–249. [PubMed: 
22285421] 

Ting JT, Feng G. Neurobiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder: insights into neural circuitry 

dysfunction through mouse genetics. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2011a; 21(6):842–848. [PubMed: 
21605970] 

Ting JT, Feng G. Neurobiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder: insights into neural circuitry 

dysfunction through mouse genetics. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2011b; 21(6):842–848. [PubMed: 
21605970] 

Tolin DF, Abramowitz JS, Brigidi BD, Foa EB. Intolerance of uncertainty in obsessive-compulsive 

disorder. J Anxiety Disord. 2003; 17(2):233–242. [PubMed: 12614665] 

Tsai HC, Zhang F, Adamantidis A, Stuber GD, Bonci A, de Lecea L, Deisseroth K. Phasic firing in 

dopaminergic neurons is sufficient for behavioral conditioning. Science. 2009; 324(5930):1080–
1084. [PubMed: 19389999] 

Tucci MC, Dvorkin-Gheva A, Graham D, Amodeo S, Cheon P, Kirk A, Peel J, Taji L, Szechtman H. 

Effects of the serotonergic agonist mcpp on male rats in the quinpirole sensitization model of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2013; 227(2):277–285. 
[PubMed: 23354534] 

Tucci MC, Dvorkin-Gheva A, Johnson E, Cheon P, Taji L, Agarwal A, Foster J, Szechtman H. 

Performance of compulsive behavior in rats is not a unitary phenomenon—validation of separate 
functional components in compulsive checking behavior. Eur J Neurosci. 2014a; 40(6):2971–
2979. [PubMed: 24935528] 

Tucci MC, Dvorkin-Gheva A, Sharma R, Taji L, Cheon P, Peel J, Kirk A, Szechtman H. Separate 
mechanisms for development and performance of compulsive checking in the quinpirole 
sensitization rat model of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
2014b; 231(18):3707–3718. [PubMed: 24682503] 

Tucci MC, Dvorkin-Gheva A, Johnson E, Wong M, Szechtman H. 5-HT2a/c receptors do not mediate 
the attenuation of compulsive checking by mcpp in the quinpirole sensitization rat model of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Behav Brain Res. 2015; 279:211–217. [PubMed: 
25449840] 

Umbricht D. Polydipsia and hippocampal pathology. Biol Psychiatry. 1994; 36(10):709–710. 

[PubMed: 7880943] 

Vandebroek I, Odberg FO. Effect of apomorphine on the conflict-induced jumping stereotypy in bank 

voles. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1997; 57(4):863–868. [PubMed: 9259017] 

Wang L, Simpson HB, Dulawa SC. Assessing the validity of current mouse genetic models of 

obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behav Pharmacol. 2009; 20(2):119–133. [PubMed: 19339874] 

Weiss S, Yaski O, Eilam D, Portugali J, Blumenfeld-Lieberthal E. Network analysis of rat spatial 

cognition: behaviorally-established symmetry in a physically asymmetrical environment. PLoS 
One. 2012; 7(7):e40760. [PubMed: 22815808] 

Welch JM, Lu J, Rodriguiz RM, Trotta NC, Peca J, Ding JD, Feliciano C, Chen M, Adams JP, Luo J, 
Dudek SM, Weinberg RJ, Calakos N, Wetsel WC, Feng G. Cortico-striatal synaptic defects and 
OCD-like behaviours in sapap3-mutant mice. Nature. 2007; 448(7156):894–900. [PubMed: 
17713528] 

Welkenhuysen M, Gligorijevic I, Ameye L, Prodanov D, Van Huffel S, Nuttin B. Neuronal activity in 

the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis in a rat model for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behav 
Brain Res. 2013; 240:52–59. [PubMed: 23195114] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 42

Westenberg HG, Fineberg NA, Denys D. Neurobiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder: serotonin 

and beyond. CNS Spectr. 2007; 12(2 Suppl. 3):14–27.

Willner P, Muscat R, Papp M. Chronic mild stress-induced anhedonia: a realistic animal model of 

depression. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 1992; 16(4):525–534. [PubMed: 1480349] 

Willner P. The validity of animal models of depression. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1984; 83(1):1–16. 

[PubMed: 6429692] 

Willner P. The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia: current status, future prospects. Int Clin 

Psychopharmacol. 1997; 12(6):297–308. [PubMed: 9547131] 

Willner P. Chronic mild stress (cms) revisited: consistency and behavioural-neurobiological 

concordance in the effects of cms. Neuropsychobiology. 2005; 52(2):90–110. [PubMed: 
16037678] 

Wingfield JC, Maney DL, Breuner CW, Jacobs JD, Lynn S, Ramenofsky M, Richardson RD. 

Ecological bases of hormone-behavior interactions: the emergency life history stage. Am Zool. 
1998; 38(1):191–206.

Winter C, Flash S, Klavir O, Klein J, Sohr R, Joel D. The role of the subthalamic nucleus in 

‘compulsive’ behavior in rats. Eur J Neurosci. 2008a; 27(8):1902–1911. [PubMed: 18412611] 

Winter C, Lemke C, Sohr R, Meissner W, Harnack D, Juckel G, Morgenstern R, Kupsch A. High 

frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus modulates neurotransmission in limbic brain 
regions of the rat. Exp Brain Res. 2008b; 185(3):497–507. [PubMed: 17962928] 

Winter C, Mundt A, Jalali R, Joel D, Harnack D, Morgenstern R, Juckel G, Kupsch A. High frequency 
stimulation and temporary inactivation of the subthalamic nucleus reduce quinpirole-induced 
compulsive checking behavior in rats. Exp Neurol. 2008c; 210(1):217–228. [PubMed: 18076877] 

Wolmarans DW, Brand L, Stein DJ, Harvey BH. Reappraisal of spontaneous stereotypy in the deer 
mouse as an animal model of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD): response to escitalopram 
treatment and basal serotonin transporter (sert) density. Behav Brain Res. 2013; 256:545–553. 
[PubMed: 24013013] 

Wolmarans de W, Stein DJ, Harvey BH. Of mice and marbles: novel perspectives on burying behavior 

as a screening test for psychiatric illness. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2016a; 16(3):551–560. 
[PubMed: 26920212] 

Wolmarans de W, Stein DJ, Harvey BH. Social behavior in deer mice as a novel interactive paradigm 

of relevanc for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). Social Neurosci. 2016b In press. 

Wolmarans de W, Stein DJ, Harvey BH. Excessive nest building is a unique behavioural phenotype in 
the deer mouse model of obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Psychopharmacol (Oxf). 2016 In 
press. 

Woody EZ, Szechtman H. Hypnotic hallucinations and yedasentience. Contemp Hypnosis. 2000; 

17:26–31.

Woody EZ, Szechtman H. Motivation, time course, and heterogeneity in obsessive-compulsive 

disorder: response to Taylor, Mckay, and Abramowitz (2005). Psychol Rev. 2005; 112(3):658–
661.

Woody EZ, Szechtman H. Uncertainty and rituals. Behav Brain Sci. 2006; 29(06):634–635.
Woody EZ, Szechtman H. Adaptation to potential threat: the evolution, neurobiology, and 

psychopathology of the security motivation system. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2011; 35(4):1019–
1033. [PubMed: 20727910] 

Woody EZ, Szechtman H. A biological security motivation system for potential threats: are there 

implications for policy-making? Front Hum Neurosci. 2013; 7:556. [PubMed: 24058340] 

Woody EZ, Lewis V, Snider L, Grant H, Kamath M, Szechtman H. Induction of compulsive-like 
washing by blocking the feeling of knowing: an experimental test of the security-motivation 
hypothesis of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behav Brain Funct. 2005; 1(1):11. [PubMed: 
16045798] 

Woolf SH. The meaning of translational research and why it matters. JAMA. 2008; 299:211–213. 

[PubMed: 18182604] 

Zadicario P, Ronen S, Eilam D. Modulation of quinpirole-induced compulsive-like behavior in rats by 

environmental changes: implications for OCD rituals and for exploration and navigation. BMC 
Neurosci. 2007; 8:23. [PubMed: 17386094] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 43

Zerhouni E. The NIH roadmap. Science. 2003; 302:63–72. [PubMed: 14526066] 
Zitterl W, Aigner M, Stompe T, Zitterl-Eglseer K, Gutierrez-Lobos K, Wenzel T, Zettinig G, Hornik K, 

Pirker W, Thau K. Changes in thalamus-hypothalamus serotonin transporter availability during 
clomipramine administration in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008; 33(13):3126–3134. [PubMed: 18354388] 

Zor R, Keren H, Hermesh H, Szechtman H, Mort J, Eilam D. Obsessive-compulsive disorder: a 

disorder of pessimal (non-functional) motor behavior. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2009; 120(4):288–
298. [PubMed: 19291081] 

Zor R, Fineberg N, Hermesh H, Asigo G, Nelson S, Agha H, Eilam D. Are there between-country 
differences in motor behavior of obsessive-compulsive disorder patients? CNS Spectr. 2010; 
15(7):445–455. [PubMed: 20625365] 

Zor R, Fineberg N, Eilam D, Hermesh H. Video telemetry and behavioral analysis discriminate 

between compulsive cleaning and compulsive checking in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011; 21(11):814–824. [PubMed: 21470830] 

Zuchner S, Wendland JR, Ashley-Koch AE, Collins AL, Tran-Viet KN, Quinn K, Timpano KC, 

Cuccaro ML, Pericak-Vance MA, Steffens DC, Krishnan KR, Feng G, Murphy DL. Multiple rare 
sapap3 missense variants in trichotillomania and OCD. Mol Psychiatry. 2009; 14(1):6–9. 
[PubMed: 19096451] 

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 44

Fig. 1. 
Optogenetically induced increase in perseverative grooming. A) Channelrhodopsin (ChR2) 
is expressed in the ventromedial orbitofrontal cortex (VO), and a chronic fiberoptic implant 
in ventromedial striatum (VMS) is used to stimulate ChR2+ terminals projecting from VO. 
B) ChR2+ VO-VMS projections were stimulated 5 min/day for 6 days (T7 to T12). C) 6 
days of stimulation led to a progressive increase in grooming 1 h post stimulation. D) 2 wk 
after repeated stimulation (T28), ChR2+ animals still demonstrate significantly increased 
grooming (Groomchronic *P < 0.03) despite no intervening stimulation. E) Progressive 
increase in evoked firing rate over course of multiple days. Z-scores indicate activity before 
vs. after light. (Modified from Ahmari et al., 2013).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 45

Fig. 2. 
MK-801 significantly increased daily mean (±SEM) water drinking across days in the 
schedule-induced polydipsia (SIP) paradigm. Experimental groups received saline (1.0 
ml/kg) or the NMDA receptor blocker MK-801 (0.5 mg/kg) twice daily for 7 days followed 
by a 4-daywashout prior to the beginning of testing. Control groups received the same drug 
treatments but instead of receiving one food pellet each minute according to the fixed time 
schedule during daily 2-h sessions, they received 120 pellets in a dish placed next to the 
feeder cup in the test chamber. Only the experimental groups showed SIP and the MK-801 
group drank more. *Analysis of variance revealed a significant 3-way interaction [group 
(MK-801 and saline) × condition (experimental and control) × day], F(1,36) = 5.88, p = 
0.02. MK-801 Experimental and Saline Experimental groups did not differ significantly on 
day 1, t(22) = 0.98, p = 0.34, but by day 21 the MK-801 Experimental group was drinking 
more, t(22)=3.30, p = 0.004. From Hawken et al. (2011).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 46

Fig. 3. 
Y-maze test used to identify different response strategies in rat. During the training phase, 
food-restricted rats are started in the same arm on each trial and learn to choose the arm 
baited with a food pellet (Reward). On probe test trials, rats are started in the arm that was 
neither the usual start arm nor the arm where a food pellet was found. At the choice point, a 
right turn reflects a habit learning (striatal) strategy and a left turn reflects a place learning 
(hippocampal) strategy. No food reward is provided on probe trials.

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 47

Fig. 4. 
Number of animal that used response (habit) or place-learning strategies in groups pre-
treated for 5 days with amphetamine (AMPH; 1.5 mg/kg) or saline. † = significantly greater 
proportion than expected by chance in binomial probability test. From Gregory et al. (2015).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 48

Fig. 5. 
The heterogeneous nature of deer mouse stereotypy. Deer mouse stereotypy is 
heterogeneous within a given population of animals, with approximately 45% of animals 
classified as having high stereotypic behavior (HSB), 41% as having low stereotypic 
behavior (LSB), and 16% as being non-stereotypic (NSB). In this graph, deer mice are 
compared to C57Bl/6 mice as control. From Korff et al. (2008).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 49

Fig. 6. 
Differential response of deer mouse stereotypy to chronic fluoxetine and desipramine 
treatment. Effect of treatment with 20mg/kg fluoxetine, 20mg/kg desipramine and saline on 
stereotypic behavior of deer mice. Baseline (untreated) stereotypic activity for each 
treatment group (solid bars) is provided for high stereotypic behavior (H) mice. Data 
represent the average of three behavioral assessment sessions forthe baseline score and a 
once-off measurement for the treatment altered score (open bars), and expressed as the mean 
± SEM. The number of animals (n) is shown below the indicated drug treatment. Locomotor 
effects following the various drug treatments were minimal (data not shown). *p<0.05 end-
point vs baseline analysis for each treatment group (Student’s t-test). #p<0.05 end-point 
analysis compared to post-saline treatment (Dunnett’s test). From Korff et al. (2008).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 50

Fig. 7. 
Cortical but not striatal glutathione redox imbalance is correlated with severity of stereotypy 
in deer mice. Comparative oxidized (GSSG; top panel) and reduced (GSH; bottom panel) 
glutathione in the frontal cortex and striatum of non-stereotypic (NS), low stereotypic (LSB) 
and high stereotypic (HSB) deer mice (n = 20,16 and 24, respectively) are shown; **p<0.01, 
Bonferroni). Also shown are appropriate correlations between stereotypy count and GSSG 
or GSH in all animals (n = 60). From Guldenpfennig et al. (2011).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 51

Fig. 8. 
cAMP-PDE4 signaling in stereotypic deer mice, and response to fluoxetine. Top panel: 
Frontal cortical cAMP levels (A) and PDE4 enzyme activity (B) in low stereotypic (LSB) 
and high stereotypic (HSB) deer mice compared to non-stereotypic (NS) mice. Significant 
differences versus control NS mice are indicated by an asterisk (one-way ANOVA followed 
by the Tukey test; p<0.05). Data are expressed as mean ±S.E.M. Bottom panel: Effect of 
chronic fluoxetine or saline treatment (×21 days) on cAMP levels and PDE4 activity in the 
frontal cortex of HSB mice. Significant differences versus control SAL are indicated by an 
asterisk (Students t-test; p < 0.05). Data shown represent the mean ±S.E.M. From Korff et al. 
(2009).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 52

Fig. 9. 
Experimental set-up and test for compulsive checking. (a.) The open field apparatus with 4 
objects on it. (b.) Subdivision of the open field into 25 places. The software algorithm 
assigns the positions of x,y coordinates of a stop within these locales. (c.) Test for 
compulsive checking on the 8th injection of quinpirole (0.5 mg/kg). Rats are said to show 
compulsive checking behavior when their performance is significantly different from saline 
controls on all 4 measures: frequency of checking (# of stops in key locale); length of check 
(mean duration in seconds of stay in key locale); recurrence time of checking (mean duration 
in seconds of return times to key place); and, # of stops before returning to check (mean 
number of places visited between returns to key locale). *p < 0.05 vs saline controls. 
Modified from Alkhatib et al. (2013).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 53

Fig. 10. 
Performance on criteria measures of compulsive checking behavior shown by groups of rats 
with lesion to the basolateral amygdala (BLA), nucleus accumbens core (NAc), orbital 
frontal cortex (OFC) or sham lesion. Blue bars represent groups with chronic saline 
treatment (left cluster of each panel) and red bars represent groups with chronic quinpirole 
treatment (right cluster of bars of each panel). Solid fill bars in top row show effect of NAc 
lesion on frequency of checking and length of check while those in the bottom row show 
effect of OFC lesion on recurrence of checking and stops before checking. * P < 0.05 vs. 
sham controls, BLA lesion, and OFC lesion groups treated chronically with saline; ** 
P<0.05 vs every group treated chronically with saline; *** P<0.05 vs. every other group; ## 
P<0.05 vs. every group treated chronically with quinpirole as well as sham controls and NAc 
groups treated chronically with saline. Modified from Dvorkin et al. (2010). (For 
interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web 
version of this article.)

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 54

Fig. 11. 
Performance on criteria measures for compulsive checking behavior shown by groups of 
sham controls and NAc core lesion rats treated with saline or DPAT. Open bars, sham 
controls injected with saline; right hatch, sham controls injected with DPAT; gray filled bars, 
NAc core lesion rats injected with saline; color filled bars, NAc core lesion rats injected with 
DPAT. * main effect of lesion; # main effect of drug. From Tucci et al. (2014a).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 55

Fig. 12. 
Duration of negative feedback signal as measured by time to next checking bout in rats 
treated chronically with saline (blue open circles) and quinpirole (red solid squares) during 
the course of treatment to induce compulsive checking. From Dvorkin et al. (2006). (For 
interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the 
web version of this article.)

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 56

Fig. 13. 
A) the degree of anti-compulsive effects in the signal attenuation (SA) and quinpirole (QNP) 
model following high-frequency deep brain stimulation (DBS) to brain targets of the 
cortical-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical circuit (CBGTC) ÷ = no effect; B) the CBGTC loop, 
including the differential neuropathology between the two models with respect to striatal 
neurotransmitter systems and cellular arrangement. DBS applied to the STN elicits 
symptom-comprehensive effects, whereas the NAc and GPe selectively reduce compulsivity 
in the QNP and SA model, respectively. 5-HT, serotonin; DA, dopamine; EP, entopeduncular 
nucleus; GPe, external globus pallidus; GPi, internal globus pallidus; LGP, lateral globus 
pallidus; NAc, nucleus accumbens; SNr, substantia nigra pars reticulata; STN, subthalamic 
nucleus.

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 57

Fig. 14. 
The method of tracing the trajectories of locomotion and scoring the behavior in stopping 
places. The figure is based on data from Zadicario et al. (2007). a. Trajectories of traveling 
of two rats after the 18th injection of 0.5 mg/kg quinpirole (top) or saline (bottom). The 
trajectories represent the activity during the 60 min after the injection in a 2 × 2 m arena. As 
shown, the quinpirole rats traveled repeatedly the same paths in a restricted portion of the 
arena whereas the lesser activity of the saline rats spans over the entire arena, with seldom 
passing the same paths. b. Behavior of a quinpirole rat during 12 visits to the bottom right 
arena corner at which a small box was placed. Each row represents one visit, and the 
characters represent the following behaviors: A—arriving at a diagonal direction; B—snout 
contact with the box; C—climbing on top of the box; D—performing a large lateral turn; H
—departure from the corner to the left. As shown, there is high regularity in the behavior of 
the rat over repeated visits to the corner.

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 58

Fig. 15. 
Excerpt from the patient’s diary a. describing the ritual of turning on the TV. Behavior 
comprised systematic traveling between the bathroom and the TV, which could be 
schematically depicted as shown b. In the description of the acts when at the TV c., each 
visit to the TV during the ritual is depicted along one row, and each circle represents one act 
(similar acts are depicted in the same color).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 59

Fig. 16. 
The sequence of acts performed by a control individual (upper box) and an OCD patient 
(bottom box) as they lock and walk away from their car. Large circles depict common acts 
and small circles depict idiosyncratic acts. As shown, the control individual had only one 
idiosyncratic act and no repetition of acts, whereas the OCD patient had numerous 
idiosyncratic acts, repetition of common acts, and a long “tail” of idiosyncratic acts at the 
end of the task.

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.

 
 
 
 
A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

A
u
t
h
o
r

M
a
n
u
s
c
r
i
p
t

Szechtman et al.

Page 60

Fig. 17. 
The number (mean ± SEM) of common acts (open bars) and idiosyncratic acts (gray bars) in 
the repertoire of acts (repetitions excluded) of 43 OCD rituals (bottom) and their non-OCD 
controls (top). The number of common acts performed in OCD and control rituals was 
identical (open bars). However, the number of idiosyncratic acts in OCD was three-fold that 
of controls (gray bars). The overall act repertoire was almost twice as large in OCD as in 
control rituals. Moreover, in the controls there were more common than idiosyncratic acts, 
whereas in the OCD patients it was the opposite: more idiosyncratic than common acts. 
(Based on data from Eilam et al. (2012).

Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 01.
