# Yokoyama_2024_Unraveling pain experience and catastrophizing after cognitive behavioral therapy.

OPEN

Unraveling pain experience 
and catastrophizing after cognitive 
behavioral therapy

Satoshi Yokoyama 1,2*, Tomonori Adachi 3 & Atsuo Yoshino 2,4,5

Pain experiences are often complex with catastrophic cognitions, emotions, and behaviors. 
Cognitive behavioral therapists share the work of unraveling these complex experiences with their 
patients. However, the change process underlying the unraveling of the pain experience have not 
yet been quantified. We used an interrelationship-focused network model to examine the way 
an undifferentiated conceptualization between cognition and pain experience changed via group 
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). Overall, 65 participants (77.4% of all patients who entered the 
intervention) were included in the analysis; they attended the total of 12 weekly group CBT and 
filled the Short-Form McGill Pain Questionnaire and the pain catastrophizing questionnaire. Before 
treatment, there were no edges in the partial correlation-based network because of large covariation 
across items. After treatment, many edges appeared and, particularly strong couplings were found 
between items within the same subscale. The formative shift from a non-edged pre-treatment 
network to a mature post-treatment network may indicate that patients were able to conceptualize 
these symbolic constructs better. These results are probably of interest to clinicians and would be 
consistent with the fundamental monitoring process of CBT.

Effectiveness of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for chronic pain is supported by meta-analyses1–4 derived 
from randomized controlled trials and program evaluations with an emphasis on practical  aspects5. Treatment 
 packages6–9 include relaxation, cognitive restructuring, behavioral activation including pacing, and mindfulness, 
either partially or overall. A common component is the self-monitoring of pain experiences by patients, based on 
cognitive, behavioral, emotional, and physical  dimensions10. This self-monitoring formulation is fundamental to 
 CBT11 and provides a straightforward technique that facilitates the identification of cognitive events, emotions, 
behaviors, and somatic experiences by  patients12,13.

As pain encompasses subjective experience, patients with chronic pain often have complex  experiences14 with 
a confusing combination of somatic distress (physical pain) and mental anguish (psychological distress). For 
example, the catastrophizing thought the “the pain will get worse” (cognition) before starting housework raises 
anxiety and fear (emotion), resulting in the patient avoiding doing the housework like before (behavior) and 
experiencing an aggravation of muscle tension and pain (physical)15. However, patients describing these experi-
ences in such a well-distributed format before undergoing CBT is uncommon. In most cases, several cognitive 
spices, such as pain recognition and evaluation, are sprinkled with realistic physical  pain16. Catastrophic cogni-
tions are a major predictive factor of clinical outcomes, and their conceptualization and reduction contributes 
to treatment  effectiveness17,18. It is essential to extract this modifiable catastrophic cognition from the patient’s 
complex pain experience. This is because the emotional variables generated by such experiences may predispose, 
precipitate, exacerbate, accompany, and perpetuate the  pain19. Therefore, CBT therapists share with the patient 
the process of unraveling the confusion based on overlapping and undifferentiated conceptualizations of physi-
cal pain and pain-related cognition in terms of thoughts, behaviors, physiological sensations, and  emotions12. 
With a monitoring process, understanding the way patients experience pain and communicate it to others helps 
accurately assess their subjective chronic pain symptoms and plan  treatment20. However, few quantitative reports 
on changes in the understanding of symptoms in patients with chronic pain following CBT exist.

Recently, the network  approach21, which can graphically demonstrate the complex relationships among sev-
eral symptoms in patients, has gathered significant attention. It is widely used in psychiatry and psychology to 
identify interrelationships among symptoms. In this approach, correlations between individual symptoms are 

1Faculty  of  Humanities,  Niigata  University,  Niigata,  Japan.  2Department  of  Psychiatry  and  Neurosciences, 
Hiroshima  University,  Hiroshima,  Japan.  3Graduate  School  of  Human  Development  and  Environment,  Kobe 
University, Kobe, Japan.  4Health Service Center, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.  5Center for Brain, Mind 
and KANSEI Sciences Research, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan. *email: syoko@human.niigata-u.ac.jp

Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:17176  

| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-68334-6

1

Vol.:(0123456789)www.nature.com/scientificreportsmodeled by statistical control, rather than by increases or decreases in aggregated representative values, such as 
means or summed factor scores. Therefore, this can clarify detailed interactions between symptoms or patients’ 
cognitive concepts that cannot be captured using traditional analyses based on increases or decreases in overall 
the representative values. Interaction-focused modeling is consistent with the general formulation of CBT and 
may be useful for visualizing the way patients associate each symptom. Previous studies using network models 
have revealed condition dependence between fear of movement and neuromuscular and motor characteristics 
in patients with neck  pain22 and identified cognitive factors associating pain and affective impairment in patients 
with chronic  pain23. Specifically, Thompson et al.23 used a network model to estimate complex interactions 
between pain intensity, impact on life activities, avoidance behavior, efficacy for pain, depression, and anxiety. 
Results indicated that self-efficacy was directly related to the other constructs, with fear avoidance and disability 
acting as mediators. The network approach has been employed to understand the complexity of symptoms in 
patients with chronic pain; however, the way CBT alters the association between cognition and pain experience 
has not been examined. Therefore, in this study, we examined the changes in the relationship between these fac-
tors using a network analysis of self-reported pain experience and catastrophizing of patients before and after 
CBT. Again, many patients with chronic pain have undifferentiated and overlapping physical pain experiences 
and catastrophic cognitions. During our CBT program, participants repeatedly categorized their pain experiences 
into cognitive and somatic aspects; we hypothesized that the undifferentiated conceptualization between such 
aspects could be unraveled and a highly discriminative network may be detected after the CBT.

Results
Complete data of the participants are presented in Table 1. Pairwise t-tests on the pre- and post-treatment SF-
MPQ and PCS item scores showed significant differences for many items (see Table 1: 9/15 (60%) SF-MPQ items 
and 13/13 (100%) PCS items); that is, items with significant differences decreased (i.e., showed an improvement).
The results of the network estimation are shown in Fig. 1. The circled dots represent the nodes of this network, 
each of which is an item in the questionnaire. If lines (edges) are displayed between nodes, there is a significant 

Scale

Factor

Item

Short-Form McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF-MPQ)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Sensory

Sensory

Sensory

Sensory

Sensory

Sensory

Sensory

Sensory

Sensory

Sensory

Sensory

Affective

Affective

Affective

Affective

Throbbing

Shooting

Stabbing

Sharp

Cramping

Gnawing

Hot/Burning

Aching

Heavy

Tender

Splitting

Tiring/Exhausting

Sickening

Fearful

Punishing/Cruel

Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

Rumination

I worry all the time about whether the pain will end

Helplessness

I feel I can’t go on

Helplessness

It’s terrible and I think it’s never going to get any better

Helplessness

It’s awful and I feel that it overwhelms me

Helplessness

I feel I can’t stand it anymore

Magnification

I become afraid that the pain will get worse

Magnification

I keep thinking of other painful events

Rumination

I anxiously want the pain to go away

Rumination

I can’t seem to keep it our of my mind

Rumination

I keep thinking about how much it hurts

Rumination

I keep thinking about how badly I want the pain to stop

Helplessness There’s nothing I can do to reduce the intensity of the pain

Magnification

I wonder whether something serious may happen

Pre-
treatment

Post-
treatment

Pairwise test

M

SD M

SD

t

p

1.71

1.09

0.85

1.31

1.06

0.43

1.00

1.71

1.38

0.89

0.80

1.80

0.71

0.68

0.69

3.42

2.09

2.35

2.14

2.31

2.98

1.97

3.91

2.85

2.60

3.25

2.26

1.72

1.03

1.00

1.12

1.10

1.00

0.83

1.20

0.96

1.00

1.03

1.02

1.00

1.00

0.92

0.97

0.95

1.11

1.08

1.20

1.27

0.94

1.26

0.34

1.05

1.24

0.97

1.19

1.26

1.51

0.95

0.68

1.02

0.88

0.37

0.66

1.31

1.08

0.78

0.42

1.31

0.46

0.46

0.45

2.97

1.52

1.75

1.40

1.66

2.20

1.51

3.62

2.48

2.06

2.55

1.38

1.11

0.99

0.91

1.00

0.96

0.94

0.84

0.96

1.00

0.89

0.89

0.79

1.07

0.83

0.81

0.85

1.08

1.20

1.16

1.25

1.35

1.21

1.24

0.72

1.11

1.14

1.20

1.11

1.17

1.66

1.24

1.44

2.63

1.37

0.66

3.43

2.89

2.52

1.02

3.12

4.23

2.20

2.67

2.39

3.65

4.45

4.78

5.18

4.42

5.31

2.76

4.51

2.52

3.44

4.88

5.37

4.70

0.102

0.219

0.154

0.011

0.176

0.509

0.001

0.005

0.014

0.311

0.003

 < .001

0.031

0.009

0.020

0.001

 < .001

 < .001

 < .001

 < .001

 < .001

0.007

 < .001

0.014

0.001

 < .001

 < .001

 < .001

Table 1.   Descriptive statistics of each item score at pre- and post-treatment.

Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:17176  | 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-68334-6

2

Vol:.(1234567890)www.nature.com/scientificreports/Figure 1.   Estimated Networks for Pre- and Post-treatment. Note These networks consist of items from the 
Short-Form McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF-MPQ) and the Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS). Each node 
represents an item labeled with the scale name and item number. Node colors are assigned by each factor of the 
scale: pink = SF-MPQ Affective, khaki = SF-MPQ Sensory, green = PCS Helplessness, blue = PCS Magnification, 
and purple = PCS Rumination. Edges reflect partial correlation coefficients; the thicker the edge, the higher the 
coefficient. The color of the edge indicates a positive partial correlation coefficient for blue and a negative one for 
red.

partial correlation between them. The pre–CBT network had zero edges, whereas the post-CBT network had 
129/378 nonzero edges (only one of which was negative: SF-MPQ 7 – PCS 8). The density, reflecting the per-
centage of observed edges, was 0 for the pre-CBT network model and 0.34 for the post-CBT network. Briefly, 
the presence of a nonzero edge represents the observation of a nonzero partial correlation coefficient between 
the two items. However, as mentioned in the Introduction, catastrophizing and pain experiences usually cross-
modify each other. As a sparse relationship in our pre-CBT network might be incongruent with known con-
cepts, we verified the validity of the measured data by visualizing a network based on Spearman’s correlation 
coefficients (Fig. 2). We observed that both Spearman’s correlation networks revealed significant edges between 
many items, representing the well-known correlations between the SF-MPQ and PCS items. In other words, the 

Figure 2.   Spearman’s Correlations Visualized on the Network (Uncontrolled Correlation Coefficient). Note 
Spearman’s correlation coefficients between items on the Short-Form McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF-MPQ) 
and the Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS) are visualized along the network arrangement in Fig. 1. Note that no 
statistical controls were imposed on them as network models. Each node represents an item labeled with the 
scale name and item number. Node colors are assigned by each factor of the scale: pink = SF-MPQ Affective, 
khaki = SF-MPQ Sensory, green = PCS Helplessness, blue = PCS Magnification, and purple = PCS Rumination. 
Edges reflect Spearman’s correlation coefficients; the thicker the edge, the higher the coefficient. The color of the 
edge’s color indicates a positive coefficient for blue and a negative one for red. Nodes are located with the results 
of Fig. 1.

Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:17176  | 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-68334-6

3

Vol.:(0123456789)www.nature.com/scientificreports/strong relationship between them was preserved when simple correlations were computed without considering 
surrounding influences.

It should be noted that the edges of our network model reflect partial correlation coefficients. In addition, 
the regularization rounded weak correlations to zero, thus visualizing a more conservative partial correlation 
relationship. Therefore, we can conclude that Spearman’s correlations were eliminated by controlling for the 
global covariates among the items using the partial correlation approach and regularization. Controlling for 
global covariates in the network model means removing the influence of all other items in order to evaluate the 
correlation between each  item24. For example, while the Spearman’s correlation coefficient indicates the overall 
correlation between two items, our network model calculated a “partial correlation” that excludes the influence 
of other items. When only conservative partial correlations were extracted, the confounding across items had 
enough variance to outweigh them.

However, the post-CBT network preserved the linkage between the two items even after controlling for 
the effects of the other items. In particular, the nodes between items belonging to the same factor, such as the 
“sensory” of the SF-MPQ and the “rumination” and “helplessness” of the PCS, were strongly connected. The 
uncontrolled Spearman network also showed stronger connections between PCS items after treatment. From 
these findings, it may be said that stronger connections were formed between certain items within the same 
factor, reducing the influence (confusion) of other concepts and factors.

Discussion
This study focused on self-monitoring, the most common component of CBT for chronic pain, and examined 
the way in which CBT alters the connection between pain experience and catastrophic cognition. Using a net-
work model to highlight linkages, we found that the sparse partial correlation network became denser after CBT 
treatment. In addition, the post-treatment network showed stronger associations, particularly within the same 
factor. No specific associations were established between any of the paired items of pain experience and cata-
strophic cognition before treatment. In summary, CBT might enhance the specific relationship between similar 
symptomatic items and their discriminability from other symptom categories. Despite the limited population, 
these findings may be of interest to clinicians. The results were very similar to the structure of self-monitoring in 
CBT, which promotes conceptual discrimination. This understanding is consistent with the treatment goals and 
may contribute to explain the effects of CBT on chronic pain. However, it should be noted that our CBT package 
included other treatment components, such as cognitive restructuring as well as consistent self-monitoring work. 
Whether these results were driven by self-monitoring, other treatment components, or the combined approach 
should be explored in the future.

The sparse pre-treatment network appeared to have already “unraveled” the complex entanglement of pain 
and cognition. Nevertheless, the absence of significant edges between each item should be attributed to the fact 
that the estimation was based on partial  correlations24. Significant relationships between SF-MPQ and PCS 
haves been reported in many  studies25–27. In our data, the items were well connected in the network using the 
Spearman’s correlation method. Therefore, the loss of edges shown in the pretreatment network indicated that 
little specific correlation between the two items remained after removing the influence of other  items24. According 
to the proposal for this network  approach24, this was due to an entirely confounding relationship of the overall 
covariance beyond the pairs. In other words, the sparseness of the pre-treatment network suggested that each 
patient’s pain sensation and cognition were indistinguishable and generalized. As discussed in the following 
paragraphs, this facet of the network may have the potential to capture patients in clinical practice. However, it 
is premature to immediately generalize our results. Partial correlation-based estimation is strongly influenced 
by the items that are fed into the model, and it would be preferable to test the robustness of this pretreatment 
network when including emotional and behavioral factors as well as comparisons with non-pain patients.

In clinical practice, it is common for patients experiencing pain to be confused by unrealistic catastrophic 
 cognitions14,16,20. These pain-processing mechanisms may amplify the sensory components of pain and promote 
chronic  pain28. In essence, the understanding based on our findings might be consistent with cognitive-behavioral 
models and other psychosocial models of chronic pain. In patients with chronic pain, the constant presence of 
pain causes a habitual concentration on the pain sensation and on thinking about the pain  experience29,30. As 
a result, they report a complex experience involving both realistic physical pain and pain-related cognitions 
and behaviors. Our pre-treatment network reflects the pre-treatment conditions before starting the therapeutic 
process. So, CBT therapists typically share with patients the process of unraveling this complex experience, 
using a framework of cognitive, behavioral, physical, and emotional  aspects31. Because this typical technique is 
self-monitoring, it was of great interest to investigate how self-monitoring can modify this network, given the 
nature of our treatment package in which self-monitoring is consistently implemented.

After treatment, the partial correlation network appeared differently, with a strong association within each 
symptom category and discrimination between categories. This indicates that the confounding interference from 
other symptoms decreased and the cohesiveness of symptoms within the same category increased. This could be 
inferred as well from the Spearman’s correlation network, especially in the PCS. The formulation of symptoms was 
repeatedly shared with the patient in our program, possibly resulting in an increase in the capacity of the patients 
to discriminate between pain experiences and cognition. While our network approach probably contributed to 
the detection of this complex phenomenon, it remains unclear which treatment component brought about this. 
At the least, we restrict our subsequent discussion to the catastrophic cognitions and pain experiences included 
in this network. Catastrophic cognitions are closely related to several elements of pain perception, including 
fear, avoidance behavior, loss of control, and involvement in failed  strategies17. Thus, catastrophic cognition 
is recognized by many professionals, not solely CBT therapists, as an important therapeutic factor. Cognitive 
fusion, which interprets catastrophic cognition as realistic, interferes with physical  functioning32. The separation 

Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:17176  | 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-68334-6

4

Vol:.(1234567890)www.nature.com/scientificreports/of cognitive and realistic pain experiences after CBT may have a therapeutic effect that eliminates this problem. 
CBT self-monitoring provides methodologies that help patients identify cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and 
physical  aspect12,13. Additionally, this monitoring process leads to an accurate assessment of subjective pain 
symptoms of the patients and treatment  planning20. Our study provides a first step toward empirical evidence 
that patients can conceptualize cognition and pain sensations after CBT.

This study has several limitations. Several network models have recently been proposed for time-dependent 
 data33,34. However, our dataset was too low dimensional for the number of measurements to fit these analytical 
models. Therefore, based on a recent  study35, we estimated the pre- and post-treatment separately. Since our 
outcomes that had changed with treatment do not preserve the temporal stationary of the  series36, there would 
be no need to enforce a time series model. With the advancements in computational models, the validity of our 
approach need to be reassessed. Additionally, we specifically focused on the sensory (physical) and cognitive 
aspects of the four components, including emotion and behavior. Emotions can be partially assessed using the 
SF-MPQ; however, the behavioral component cannot. Nevertheless, catastrophic cognition has the greatest 
impact on the physical and mental health of the  patients37. Although our focus was limited, we have addressed 
this catastrophic cognition, which may provide important clinical implications. Nevertheless, it is important to 
expand our results by focusing on the relationship between emotional  factors19,38 and pain. The small sample 
size was a limitation and, we should note that the it majorly was represented by females.

In conclusion, this study suggested that the CBT has the potential to unravel the interrelationship between 
symptom concepts consisting of physical pain experience and catastrophic cognition. Self-monitoring, a basic 
element of CBT, involves labeling the experiences of a patient into various psychosocial aspects, such as cognition 
and behavior, and examining the interaction between them. However, empirical evidence for this essential work 
has not been identified until now. Our findings could allow CBT therapists to focus more on the conceptual 
discrimination of pain experiences and to work on unraveling the confusions of the patients. For more clinical 
implications, this study should be replicated with an improved design that addresses sample size and gender 
bias, as well as the inclusion of other clinical variables such as pain-related behaviors and emotions including 
anxiety, depression and  anger38.

Methods
Patients
Eighty-four patients were recruited from the Department of Psychiatry and Neurosciences, Anesthesiology and 
Critical Care, Orthopedic Surgery or Dental Anesthesiology at Hiroshima University Hospital. All participants 
provided their written informed consent to receive treatment and participate in this study before enrollment. 
Patients were included in the study if they had a diagnosis of somatoform pain disorder, as established by a 
psychiatrist with more than 10 years of experience using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID)39; 
their somatic symptoms could not be fully explained by the various medical test findings or did not match 
the cause and severity of the pain, and thus were not due to another medical condition. Conversely, patients 
were excluded from the study if they had HIV and cancer-related pain, as these are associated with malignant 
diseases that entail a different symptom trajectory than chronic pain states; difficulty understanding the purpose 
of study (e.g. presence of dementia, delirium, or psychosis); organic brain disorder (e.g., cerebral hemorrhage, 
or infarction); and schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder, or seizure disorder not adequately controlled by 
medication and/or current substance abuse. Seventy-five of all participants completed all 12 sessions, but only 
65 (age = 50.15 ± 12.58 y, female n = 45 (69%)) responded to the required questionnaires. This study was reviewed 
and approved by the Ethical Committee for Clinical Research of Hiroshima University (approval number: C-131). 
The clinical procedures adhered to the principles of the declaration of Helsinki.

Group cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for chronic pain
The patients participated in a group CBT program once a week. The program comprised 12 sessions (in the 
span of approximately 3 months), typically with 3–6 patients in each group. The effectiveness of this program 
has been reported  previously26. An experienced psychiatrist provided the primary intervention, with the aid 
of a clinical psychologist specializing in CBT and a physical therapist. Each session included a review of the 
previous session and life situations of the participants using homework, psychoeducation on new content using 
textbooks, practical exercises, and homework assignments. The following topics were allocated to each session: 
session 1, psychoeducation on CBT and pain; session 2, introduction to pain diary; session 3, self-monitoring 
using the pain’s mind-map based on a CBT model; session 4, abdominal breathing training; session 5, progressive 
muscle relaxation training; session 6, activity scheduling including a pacing (managing the patient’s daily activity 
in an attempt to remain behaviorally active but not overdoing it); session 7, psychoeducation on the impact 
of cognition; session 8, cognitive restructuring; session 9, assertions focusing on the feelings of the patients; 
session 10, schema identification and refutation; session 11, relapse prevention; session 12, review of actions 
and achievement goals.

Pain diaries and pain mind-maps were used as homework in all sessions that occurred after session 2 and 
3, respectively. The pain diary included tasks on identifying somatic experiences, feelings, and thoughts by 
observing specific pain experience situations and recording temporal variations in pain. The patients were 
thoroughly trained in self-monitoring of the cognition-behavior-emotion-physical cycle in painful situations 
almost every day during the CBT program period.

Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:17176  | 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-68334-6

5

Vol.:(0123456789)www.nature.com/scientificreports/Self-reported outcomes
Short‑form McGill pain  questionnaire40
The Short-Form McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF-MPQ) is widely used to assess various characteristics of pain. It 
comprised of 15 items (11 sensory and 4 affective), each rated on an intensity scale as follows: 0, none; 1, mild; 
2, moderate; or 3, severe. The Japanese version was developed by Arimura et al.41 and its reliability has been 
reported to be acceptable (Cronbach’s α = 0.78-87).

Pain catastrophizing  scale16
The Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS) was used to assess the extent to which a person engaged in pain-related 
catastrophic thoughts. It comprises of 13 items (5 rumination, 5 helplessness, and 3 magnification), each rated on 
its frequency on a five-point Likert scale from 0 (“not at all”) to 4 (“all the time”). The Japanese version’s reliability 
has been reported to be acceptable (Cronbach’s α = 0.89)42. The three-factor structure of this scale was validated 
using a Japanese  sample43. Although only item scores were used in this study, the items were labeled according 
to the aforementioned three-factor structure to assist interpretation.

Estimation of regularized partial correlation networks
We employed a network analysis to visualize and examine the relationship between pain experiences and 
catastrophic cognitions. The following steps were taken to ensure robust and replicable analysis.

Pre- and post-treatment regularized partial correlation networks were independently estimated. Briefly, this 
network model visualized the partial correlation between two items controlling for other item relationships, 
although regularized. Partial correlation measures the degree of association between two items, while controlling 
for the effects of other items. This could avoid the pseudo-correlation among incorporated within the network 
and helps isolate the direct relationships between nodes (i.e., items). To validate the partial correlation network, 
we also computed Spearman’s correlation coefficients, which measure the strength and direction of the monotonic 
relationship between the two items. Spearman’s correlation is a non-parametric measure and does not assume 
normal distribution of the data.

A network is made up of nodes (points of contact) and the edges (lines) that connect them. Here, each 
network had 28 nodes corresponding to 15 SF-MPQ items and 13 PCS items, with an estimated number of edges 
of [(28 × 27)/2] = 378. Edges represented the regularized partial correlation coefficients between two  items44, 
that is, those were interpreted as the existence of an association between two nodes after adjusting for all other 
nodes in the  network33.

Network model estimation used graphical  LASSO45, which is a regularization  algorithm46. Graphical LASSO 
applies a penalty to the network complexity and can produce a sparse network that highlights only the most 
significant relationships. This method is particularly useful for high-dimensional data, where the number of 
variables is large compared to the number of observations. As this method pushed small partial correlations 
to zero in order to avoid overestimation under the small sample size, our network models were sparse and 
conservative. The best-fit network models were selected based on an extended Bayesian information criterion 
(EBIC). EBIC is a criterion for model selection among a finite set of models, where a lower EBIC value indicates 
a better fit. This criterion balances the model complexity and goodness of fit, preventing overfitting. Regularized 
models using LASSO with EBIC have high specificity and varying sensitivity based on sample size and true 
network  structure47.

Software for network analysis
Graphical LASSO with EBIC was automatically estimated using the “EBICglasso” function of the “qgraph” 
 package48,49. To report the density of each network quantitatively, we calculated it according to the definitions 
in a standard  textbook50 on network analysis. Edge information was extracted from network objects created by 
“qgraph” and the density was calculated by dividing the actual number of edges in the network by the number 
of possible edges. Network models were visualized using the Fruchterman–Reingold layout (“spring” in the 
“qgraph” package). In this layout, nodes linked by strong edges are placed close to each other, while those that 
are not are placed far apart. Regarding ease of viewing, we used the average across two networks. Blue and red 
edges represented positive and negative partial correlation coefficients, respectively. Nodes were colored after 
being placed, according to the scale or subscales. The R code used for the analyses is attached as supplementary 
material.

Ethics approval
All research procedures were reviewed and approved by the Ethical Committee for Clinical Research of Hiroshima 
University (approval number: C-131). The clinical procedures adhered to the principles of the declaration of 
Helsinki. All participants provided their written informed consent to receive treatment and participate in this 
study before enrollment.

Data availability
The data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request.

Received: 20 February 2024; Accepted: 22 July 2024

Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:17176  | 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-68334-6

6

Vol:.(1234567890)www.nature.com/scientificreports/References
  1.  Morley, S., Eccleston, C. & Williams, A. Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of cognitive behaviour 

therapy and behaviour therapy for chronic pain in adults, excluding headache. Pain 80, 1–13 (1999).

  2.  Eccleston, C., Morley, S., Williams, A., Yorke, L. & Mastroyannopoulou, K. Systematic review of randomised controlled trials of 
psychological therapy for chronic pain in children and adolescents, with a subset meta-analysis of pain relief. Pain 99, 157–165 
(2002).

  3.  Schütze, R. et al. How can we best reduce pain catastrophizing in adults with chronic noncancer pain? A systematic review and 

meta-analysis. J. Pain 19, 233–256 (2018).

  4.  de Williams, A. C., Fisher, E., Hearn, L. & Eccleston, C. Psychological therapies for the management of chronic pain (excluding 

headache) in adults. Cochrane Datab ase Syst. Rev. 8, 7407 (2020).

  5.  Morley, S., Williams, A. & Hussain, S. Estimating the clinical effectiveness of cognitive behavioural therapy in the clinic: Evaluation 

of a CBT informed pain management programme. Pain 137, 670–680 (2008).

  6.  Hosogoshi, H. et al. Pilot study of a basic individualized cognitive behavioral therapy program for chronic pain in Japan. Biopsy‑

chosoc. Med. 14, 6 (2020).

  7.  Beehler, G. P. et al. Brief cognitive behavioral therapy for chronic pain. Clin. J. Pain 35, 809–817 (2019).
  8.  Day, M. A. Mindfulness‑based cognitive therapy for chronic pain: A clinical manual and guide (Wiley, 2017).
  9.  Lim, J.-A. et al. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for patients with chronic pain: Implications of gender differences in empathy. Medicine 

97, e10867–e10867 (2018).

 10.  Otis, J. D. Managing chronic pain: A cognitive‑behavioral therapy approach, therapist guide (Oxford University Press, 2007). https:// 

doi. org/ 10. 1093/ med: psych/ 97801 95329 162. 001. 0001.

 11.  Kuyken, W., Padesky, C. A. & Dudley, R. Collaborative case conceptualization: Working effectively with clients in cognitive‑behavioral 

therapy (Guilford Press, 2009).

 12.  Cohen, J. S., Edmunds, J. M., Brodman, D. M., Benjamin, C. L. & Kendall, P. C. Using self-monitoring: Implementation of col-

laborative empiricism in cognitive-behavioral therapy. Cogn. Behav. Pract. 20, 419–428 (2013).

 13.  Burrell, J. & Robinson, L. Chronic pain: Psychological formulation and MDT working. Anaesth. Intensive Care Med. 20, 576–578 

(2019).

 14.  Drummond, P. & Nicola, M. Editorial on the research topic ‘socio-psychological influences on pain’ for frontiers in pain mecha-

nisms. Front. Pain Res. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fpain. 2022. 11224 66 (2022).

 15.  Vlaeyen, J. W. S. & Linton, S. J. Fear-avoidance and its consequences in chronic musculoskeletal pain: A state of the art. Pain 85, 

317–332 (2000).

 16.  Sullivan, M. J. L., Bishop, S. R. & Pivik, J. The pain catastrophizing scale: Development and validation. Psychol. Assess. 7, 524–532 

(1995).

 17.  Yoshino, A. et al. Role of coping with negative emotions in cognitive behavioral therapy for persistent somatoform pain disorder: 

Is it more important than pain catastrophizing?. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 73, 560–565 (2019).

 18.  Edwards, R. R., Cahalan, C., Mensing, G., Smith, M. & Haythornthwaite, J. A. Pain, catastrophizing, and depression in the rheumatic 

diseases. Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 7, 216–224 (2011).

 19.  Fernandez, E. & Kerns, R. D. Pain and affective disorders: Looking beyond the ‘chicken and egg’ conundrum. In Pain comorbidities: 

Understanding and treating the complex patient (eds Giamberardino, M. A. & Jensen, T. S.) 279–296 (IASP Press, 2012).

 20.  Sohn, H.-S. et al. Impaired empathic abilities among patients with complex regional pain syndrome (Type I). Psychiatry Investig. 

13, 34–42 (2016).

 21.  Borsboom, D. & Cramer, A. O. J. Network analysis: An integrative approach to the structure of psychopathology. Ann. Rev. Clin. 

Psychol. 9, 91–121 (2013).

 22.  Devecchi, V., Alalawi, A., Liew, B. & Falla, D. A network analysis reveals the interaction between fear and physical features in 

people with neck pain. Sci. Rep. 12, 11304 (2022).

 23.  Thompson, E. L., Broadbent, J., Fuller-Tyszkiewicz, M., Bertino, M. D. & Staiger, P. K. A network analysis of the links between 

chronic pain symptoms and affective disorder symptoms. Int. J. Behav. Med. 26, 59–68 (2019).

 24.  Williams, D. R. & Rast, P. Back to the basics: Rethinking partial correlation network methodology. Br. J. Math. Stat. Psychol. 73, 

187–212 (2020).

 25.  Sim, X. L. J. et al. Association of pain catastrophizing and depressive states with multidimensional early labor pain assessment in 

nulliparous women having epidural analgesia – a secondary analysis. J. Pain Res. 14, 3099–3107 (2021).

 26.  Yoshino, A. et al. Effectiveness of group cognitive behavioral therapy for somatoform pain disorder patients in Japan: A preliminary 

non-case-control study. Psychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 69, 763–772 (2015).

 27.  Moore, E., Adams, H., Ellis, T., Thibault, P. & Sullivan, M. J. L. Assessing catastrophic thinking associated with debilitating mental 

health conditions. Disabil. Rehabil. 40, 317–322 (2018).

 28.  Rabbitts, J. A., Palermo, T. M. & Lang, E. A. A conceptual model of biopsychosocial mechanisms of transition from acute to chronic 

postsurgical pain in children and adolescents. J. Pain Res. 13, 3071–3080 (2020).

 29.  Buenaver, L. F. et al. Evidence for indirect effects of pain catastrophizing on clinical pain among myofascial temporomandibular 

disorder participants: The mediating role of sleep disturbance. Pain 153, 1159–1166 (2012).

 30.  McCracken, L. M., Barker, E. & Chilcot, J. Decentering, rumination, cognitive defusion, and psychological flexibility in people 

with chronic pain. J. Behav. Med. 37, 1215–1225 (2014).

 31.  Huppert, J. D. The building blocks of treatment in cognitive-behavioral therapy. Isr. J. Psychiatry Relat. Sci. 46, 245–250 (2009).
 32.  Özkan, S., Zale, E. L., Ring, D. & Vranceanu, A.-M. Associations between pain catastrophizing and cognitive fusion in relation to 
pain and upper extremity function among hand and upper extremity surgery patients. Ann. Behav. Med. 51, 547–554 (2017).
 33.  Epskamp, S., Waldorp, L. J., Mõttus, R. & Borsboom, D. The gaussian graphical model in cross-sectional and time-series data. 

Multivar. Behav. Res. 53, 453–480 (2018).

 34.  Haslbeck, J. M. B., Borsboom, D. & Waldorp, L. J. Moderated network models. Multivar. Behav. Res. 56, 256–287 (2021).
 35.  Ernst, M., Beutel, M. E., Zwerenz, R. & Krakau, L. Seeing the past in a new light: change in reports of childhood abuse and neglect 
before and after inpatient psychotherapy and its relevance for change in depression symptoms. Psychother. Res. 33, 222–234 (2023).
 36.  Johnson, S. U. & Hoffart, A. Metacognitive therapy versus cognitive behavioral therapy: A network approach. Front. Psychol. 9, 

2382 (2018).

 37.  Sullivan, M. J. L., Lynch, M. E. & Clark, A. J. Dimensions of catastrophic thinking associated with pain experience and disability 

in patients with neuropathic pain conditions. Pain 113, 310–315 (2005).

 38.  Fernandez, E. Anxiety, depression, and anger in pain: Research findings and clinical options. Advanced Psychological Resources Inc. 

(Advanced Psychological Resources, 2002).

 39.  First, M. B., Spitzer, R. L., Miriam, G. & Williams, J. B. W. User’s guide for the structured clinical interview for DSM‑IV axis I disorders: 

SCID‑I clinical version. (Amer Psychiatric Pub Inc, 1997).

 40.  Melzack, R. The short-form McGill pain questionnaire. Pain 30, 191–197 (1987).
 41.  Arimura, T. et al. Pain questionnaire development focusing on cross-cultural equivalence to the original questionnaire: The Japanese 

version of the short-form McGill pain questionnaire. Pain Med. 13, 541–551 (2012).

Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:17176  | 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-68334-6

7

Vol.:(0123456789)www.nature.com/scientificreports/ 42.  Matsuoka, H. & Sakano, Y. Assessment of cognitive aspect of pain: Development, reliability, and validation of japanese version of 

pain catastrophizing scale. Jpn. J. Psychosom. Med. 47, 95–102 (2007).

 43.  Iwaki, R. et al. Global catastrophizing vs catastrophizing subdomains: Assessment and associations with patient functioning. Pain 

Med. 13, 677–687 (2012).

 44.  Briganti, G., Scutari, M. & Linkowski, P. Network structures of symptoms from the zung depression scale. Psychol. Rep. 124, 

1897–1911 (2021).

 45.  Friedman, J., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. Sparse inverse covariance estimation with the graphical lasso. Biostatistics 9, 432–441 

(2008).

 46.  Foygel, R. & Drton, M. Extended Bayesian Information Criteria for Gaussian Graphical Models. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 23, 

(2010).

 47.  Trueman, T. E., Narayanasamy, P. & Ashok Kumar, J. A graph-based method for ranking of cloud service providers. J. Supercomput. 

78, 7260–7277. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11227- 021- 04156-x (2021).

 48.  Epskamp, S. & Fried, E. I. A tutorial on regularized partial correlation networks. Psychol. Methods 23, 617–634 (2018).
 49.  Epskamp, S., Cramer, A. O. J., Waldorp, L. J., Schmittmann, V. D. & Borsboom, D. qgraph: Network visualizations of relationships 

in psychometric data. J. Stat. Softw. 48, 1–18 (2012).

 50.  Wasserman, S. & Faust, K. Social network analysis (Cambridge University Press, 1994). https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ CBO97 80511  

815478.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI under Grant 22K18647, 23H01040, 18H01091, and 23H01048); 
and JST Moonshot Program Goal 9 under Grant JPMJM S2296. We would like to thank Editage (www. edita ge. 
com) for English language editing.

Author contributions
S.Y.: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing—Original Draft preparation. T.A.: 
Writing—Review and Editing, Supervision. A.Y.: Conceptualization, Investigation, Data Curation, Supervision.

Funding
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (Grant number: 22K18647, 23H01040, 23H01048), Moonshot 
Research and Development Program (Grant number: JPMJM S2296).

Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1038/ s41598- 024- 68334-6.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.Y.

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.

Publisher’s note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.

Open  Access  This  article  is  licensed  under  a  Creative  Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives  4.0  International  License,  which  permits  any  non-commercial  use,  sharing, 
distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original 
author(s)  and  the  source,  provide  a  link  to  the  Creative  Commons  licence,  and  indicate  if  you  modified  the 
licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this 
article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative 
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the 
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the 
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this 
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

© The Author(s) 2024

Scientific Reports |        (2024) 14:17176  | 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-68334-6

8

Vol:.(1234567890)www.nature.com/scientificreports/
